














































Prepared for:


Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-1 
 
 

6.0 ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC EFFECTS ASSESSMENT 
The description of the environmental and socio-economic setting, and current state of the environment 
within the Project area (Section 5.0 of this ESA), are compared in this section of the ESA against the 
Project Description (Section 2.0 of this ESA) to identify potential effects that might be caused by the 
Alberta Clipper Project. The environmental and socio-economic effects assessment uses the information 
provided in the environmental and socio-economic setting to: 

• evaluate the environmental and socio-economic elements of importance in the Project area; 

• formulate appropriate site-specific mitigative measures that are technically and economically feasible; 

• identify and evaluate Project residual effects associated with each environmental and socio-economic 
element of importance; and 

• identify the effects of the environment on the Project. 

In addition, the environmental and socio-economic effects assessment has determined the significance of 
potential adverse residual effects resulting from construction and operation activities after taking into 
consideration proposed mitigation and, where warranted, compensation measures. 

6.1 Methodology 

The assessment evaluated the environmental and socio-economic effects of the construction, operation, 
decommissioning and abandonment phases of each component of the Project (i.e., pipeline, pump 
additions, tanks, temporary facilities for construction). The assessment method included the following 
components: 

• determination of spatial and temporal boundaries for this assessment; 

• identification of biophysical and socio-economic elements; 

• identification of potential environmental and socio-economic impacts; 

• development of technically and economically feasible mitigation and, where appropriate, 
compensation measures; 

• identification of anticipated residual effects; and 

• determination of the significance of adverse residual effects. 

This environmental and socio-economic effects assessment methodology has been developed based on 
the CEA Agency’s The Authority's Guide to the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act (CEA Agency 
1994), the CEA Agency’s Cumulative Effects Assessment Practitioners Guide (Hegmann et al. 1999), the 
CEA Act and the NEB Filing Manual (NEB 2004).  

The environmental and socio-economic effects assessment associated with the construction and 
operation of the Project was a collaborative effort of several qualified professionals with element-specific 
expertise, under the guidance of representatives of TERA. 

6.1.1 Spatial and Temporal Boundaries 

Spatial Boundaries 
The spatial boundaries considered one or more of the following study areas: 

• A Footprint Study Area made up of the area directly disturbed by the Project construction and clean-
up activities, including associated physical works and activities (i.e., permanent right-of-way, 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-2 
 
 

temporary construction workspace, temporary stockpile sites, temporary staging areas, and facility 
sites). 

• An LSA consisting of the area which could potentially be affected by construction and reclamation 
activities as well as associated works and activities beyond the Footprint area. The local boundary 
varies with the discipline and issue being considered (e.g., for assessment of the effects of noise on 
wildlife, the area affected by noise (i.e., 2 km buffer) from the source is included in this boundary). For 
pump stations/terminals, the LSA consists of a 1 km radius centred on the pump station/terminal site. 
For the tank installation at the Hardisty Terminal, the LSA consists of a 2 km radius centred on the 
terminal site. 

• An RSA consists of the area extending beyond the LSA boundary. The boundary for the RSA also 
varies with the discipline and the issue being considered (e.g., for socio-economic analysis, regional 
boundaries include large communities that will be used as construction offices or regional municipal 
district boundaries). 

• A Provincial Area which extends beyond regional or administrative boundaries, but confined to 
Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba (e.g., provincial permitting boundaries, etc.). 

• A Transboundary Area which extends outside Canada. 

The ecological boundary is described within the discussions of each element. Spatial ecological 
boundaries were determined by the distribution, movement patterns and potential zones of interaction 
between an element and the Project. The ecological boundary may be limited to the Footprint (e.g., 
pipeline construction right-of-way, valve site or pump station) or extend beyond the physical boundaries of 
the area of the Project component since the distribution or movement of an element can be local, 
regional, provincial or transboundary in extent. 

Temporal Boundaries 
The time frames used in the assessment of the Project include the planning, construction, operations, and 
decommissioning and abandonment phases. The construction period (includes clearing, grading, 
trenching, testing and reclamation) for the pipeline, pump additions and tank installation is assumed to 
occur between early 2008 and late Q4 2009. A detailed construction schedule for the Project is provided 
in Section 2.4.12 of this ESA. Construction delays will not affect the overall assessment of environmental 
and socio-economic effects since the assessment has considered construction during both frozen and 
nonfrozen soil conditions, and it is assumed that pipeline construction will occur during these conditions in 
a subsequent year. The operations phase was considered to commence in late Q4 2009 following 
construction and extend an estimated 50+ years. 

6.1.2 Biophysical and Socio-Economic Elements 

Potential biophysical and socio-economic elements interacting with the Project were identified through the 
public and government consultation process, through experience gained during past construction 
programs along the Enbridge mainline system (e.g., CEP, SEP II, Terrace Phases I, II and III), through 
experience gained during other construction programs in areas with similar conditions (e.g., Alliance 
Pipeline Project near Regina where the Alberta Clipper route parallels from KPR 0.0 to KPR 23.9 and 
TransCanada PipeLines Limited pipeline where the Alberta Clipper pipeline route parallels from KPR 42.9 
to KPR 77.4), as well as the professional judgment of the assessment team. Key to determining element 
interactions with the Project was the identification of issues noted during public consultation with federal, 
provincial and municipal government agencies, local industry people, interested stakeholders and the 
general public (Section 3.0 of this ESA). 

Biophysical and socio-economic elements potentially interacting with the Project include: 

• physical elements such as physical environment, soil capability, water quality and quantity, GHG and 
air quality, and acoustic environment; 

• biological elements such as fish and fish habitat, wetlands, vegetation, wildlife and wildlife habitat, 
and species at risk; and 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-3 
 
 

• socio-economic elements such as human occupancy and resource use, heritage resources, 
traditional land and resource use, social and cultural well-being, human health, infrastructure and 
services, and employment and economy. 

Effects arising from accidents and malfunctions, and effects of the environment on the Project were also 
considered. 

Those biophysical and socio-economic elements which are not considered to interact with pump 
additions, new tank installations and temporary facilities are identified and justified in Sections 6.3, 6.4 
and 6.5 of this ESA respectively. As per Guide A.2.5 of the NEB Filing Manual, no further analysis is 
necessary for those elements where interactions between the Project component and a biophysical or 
socio-economic element are not predicted. 

6.1.3 Potential Environmental and Socio-Economic Effects 

The potential environmental and socio-economic effects resulting from the Project were identified through 
the public and government consultation process, through experience gained during past construction 
programs along the Enbridge mainline system (e.g., CEP, SEP II, Terrace Phases I, II and III), through 
experience gained during other construction programs in the area (e.g., Alliance Pipeline and 
TransCanada) as well as in nearby areas with similar conditions, and most importantly, through the 
professional judgment of the assessment team. The potential environmental and socio-economic effects 
arising from the construction and operation of the pipeline and associated pipeline facilities are identified 
in Section 6.2 of this ESA. Those effects arising from pump additions, tank installation and temporary 
facilities are identified in Sections 6.3, 6.4 and 6.5 of this ESA. 

6.1.4 Mitigative Measures 

To ensure that potential environmental and socio-economic effects are minimized during pipeline and 
facility construction and operation, a number of general and site-specific mitigative measures have been 
proposed based upon current industry-accepted standards, consultation with government agencies and 
interested groups and individuals, and the professional judgement of the assessment team. 

Mitigative measures presented in Enbridge's EGC (Enbridge 2003) will be adopted for the Alberta Clipper 
Project. The EGC is currently on file with the NEB. The EGC is complemented by site-specific mitigative 
measures outlined in Sections 6.2, 6.3 and 6.4 of this ESA. Various federal and provincial government, 
and industry standards and guidelines (e.g., AENV 1998, Alberta EUB 2007, Canadian Association of 
Petroleum Producers (CAPP) 1996, 1999, 2005, CAPP et al. 2005, DFO 1995, 1999 and 2003, Manitoba 
Natural Resources 1996, provincial COPs and federal operational position statements [DFO 2006a,b]) 
have been taken into consideration in the ESA. The Environmental As-Built Report and the first, second 
and third-year after post-construction monitoring reports for CEP, SEP II, Terrace Phases I and II were 
reviewed and applicable protection measures are included within this ESA (Interprovincial Pipe Line Inc. 
(IPL) 1995, 1998; Enbridge 2000, 2002; TERA 1995, 1996, 1999, 2000, 2001a, 2002, 2003, 2004). In 
addition, the applicable environmental alignment sheets for the Alliance Pipeline Project and 
TransCanada PipeLines Limited as well as the first-year post-construction monitoring report for Spread 
8SB of the Alliance Pipeline Project were reviewed and the applicable protection measures are included 
within this ESA (TERA 2001b). Accompanying the ESA are Photomosaic Environmental Alignment 
Sheets which identify where specific mitigative measures are to be applied (see Volume III). Highly 
qualified Environmental Inspectors will be retained by Enbridge to ensure that the mitigative measures 
within the ESA and EGC are properly implemented during construction. Environmental inspection is 
further described in Section 8.0 of this ESA. 

6.1.5 Residual Effects 

Residual effects are the net environmental and socio-economic effects remaining following the 
implementation of mitigative measures. In some situations, the recommended mitigative measures will 
completely mitigate the potential adverse effects while in other situations, the mitigative measures will 
lessen the effects, but not entirely eliminate them. Residual effects may also be induced effects (e.g., the 
introduction of weeds through mitigative effects to control erosion). Potential impacts of an element for 
which no residual effects are predicted require no further analysis. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-4 
 
 

6.1.6 Significance Analysis of Residual Effects 

The determination of significance of adverse residual effects generally followed the guidelines and 
principles of the NEB Filing Manual, the Federal Environmental Assessment Review Office (1994), and 
the CEA Agency’s Cumulative Effects Assessment Practitioners Guide (Hegmann et al. 1999). The 
agencies identify several possible methods for the determination of whether residual adverse 
environmental or socio-economic effects are significant. These include: 

• the use of established environmental standards, guidelines or objectives in relation to 
potential adverse residual effects; 

• the use of quantitative risk assessment; 

• quantitative assessment of adverse residual effects; and 

• qualitative assessment of the residual adverse effects. 

Some noise, air and water quality issues can be assessed using the standards and guidelines method. 
However, only the qualitative method was considered to be appropriate for determining the significance of 
most anticipated adverse residual effects. Consequently, the determination of significance was evaluated 
by developing a set of qualitative criteria based on those identified by Hegmann et al. (1999). These six 
criteria are identified below and their definitions are presented in Table 6.1 located at the end of 
Section 6.0 of this ESA. In some cases, the definitions were modified to accommodate discipline-specific 
parameters. Ecological context is not included in Table 6.1. However, a discussion of the ecological 
context of potential environmental issues is provided for each applicable biological element. 

• Spatial context (i.e., Footprint, LSA, RSA, provincial, transboundary). 

• Temporal context (i.e., duration and frequency of the event causing the residual effect, reversibility of 
the residual effect). 

• Ecological context (e.g., levels of existing disturbance; resilience of the receiving environment). 

• Magnitude (i.e., severity of effect in relation to environmental and/or social standards or tolerance). 

• Level of confidence or uncertainty (i.e., availability of data to substantiate the assessment conclusion, 
previous success of mitigative measures, etc.). 

• Probability or likelihood of occurrence of residual effect. 

For each environmental and socio-economic residual effect, the impact balance or direction (i.e., 
determination as to whether the effect is positive or negative) was also established. A positive impact 
balance is considered to have a net benefit to the environment. A neutral balance is defined as no net 
benefit or loss to the environment, while a negative balance is considered to be a net loss or detriment to 
the environment. 

All significance assessment criteria (e.g., temporal context, magnitude, etc.) were considered by the 
assessment team for each adverse residual environmental or socio-economic effect. Where appropriate, 
the key or most influential assessment criteria used to determine the significance of each adverse 
residual effect(s) are noted. Positive and neutral residual effects have not been assessed for significance. 
A summary of the significance evaluation for adverse residual effects arising from the construction and 
operation of the pipeline and associated pipeline facilities are identified in Section 6.2 of this ESA while 
the significance evaluation for adverse residual effects arising from pump additions, tank installations and 
temporary facilities for construction are identified in Sections 6.3, 6.4 and 6.5 of this ESA. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-5 
 
 

6.2 Effects Assessment - Pipeline and Associated Pipeline Facilities 
Construction and Operation  

Using the assessment methodology described in Section 6.1 of this ESA, the following subsections 
evaluate the potential environmental and socio-economic effects associated with the construction and 
operation of the proposed pipeline from Hardisty to the US border near Gretna as well as the associated 
pipeline facilities (i.e., block valves, scraper traps). 

Biophysical and socio-economic elements potentially interacting with the pipeline component of the 
Alberta Clipper Project include: 

• physical elements such as physical environment, soil capability, water quality and quantity, GHG and 
air quality, and acoustic environment; 

• biological elements such as fish and fish habitat, wetlands, vegetation, wildlife and wildlife habitat, 
and species at risk; 

• socio-economic elements such as human occupancy and resource use, heritage resources, 
traditional land and resource use, social and cultural well-being, human health, infrastructure and 
services, and employment and economy; and 

• accidents and malfunctions.  

The potential environmental and socio-economic effects associated with the pipeline component of the 
Project as well as the accompanying proposed mitigative measures and resulting residual effects are 
presented in Table 6.2 located at the end of Section 6.0 of this ESA. 

A summary of the significance evaluation for adverse residual effects arising from the construction and 
operation of the pipeline and associated pipeline facilities is provided in Table 6.6 located at the end of 
Section 6.0 of this ESA. The following subsections describe the evaluation of significance using the 
criteria presented in Table 6.1 for the adverse residual effects associated with the applicable biophysical 
and socio-economic elements.  

6.2.1 Physical Environment 

The potential residual effects (see Table 6.2 of this ESA) associated with the construction and operation 
of the pipeline on the physical environment include: 

• localized rill erosion could occur prior to the re-establishment of vegetation; 

• areas of minor instability may occur in fill materials as a result of terrain instabilities; and 

• topography may be altered at locations where cut slopes are too steep to be replaced. 

The potential effects of the environment on the Project (such as flooding, wildfires, climate change and 
severe weather) are discussed in Section 6.7 of this ESA. 

Localized Erosion 
Rill erosion of topsoil could occur at localized areas prior to the re-establishment of vegetation. This 
residual effect is discussed in more detail in relation to Section 6.2.2, Soil Capability of this ESA. 

Minor Terrain and Fill Instabilities 
During the construction of the pipeline, minor areas of terrain and fill instabilities may occur as a result of 
material slumping. These areas are largely confined to the valley slopes of the larger watercourses along 
the route. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-6 
 
 

Slope stability conditions along the proposed route are considered to be good, based on observations 
and operating experience of the existing Enbridge mainline system to date. The construction of the 
pipeline will comply with measures outlined in Table 6.2 of this ESA and, therefore, is not expected to 
trigger slumping events. Areas of potential terrain instability will be routinely monitored and promptly 
remediated, where warranted, to protect pipeline integrity. This residual effect is of low magnitude and 
reversible in the short-term. Effects of the environment on the Project (i.e., slumping) are discussed in 
Section 6.7 of this ESA.  

Alterations of Local Topography 
As a result of construction, topography along the proposed route may be altered at locations where cut 
slopes are too steep to be replaced. Although this unavoidable consequence will be permanent in 
localized areas and of high probability, the magnitude is considered to be low. 

Summary 
Based on Table 6.6 of this ESA, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of 
a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically 
compensated. Consequently, it is concluded that the residual effects of pipeline construction and 
operation on the physical environment will be not significant. 

6.2.2 Soil Capability 

Most of the potential impacts on soil capability associated with the construction and operation of the 
pipeline are alleviated through the application of mitigative measures (see Table 6.2 of this ESA). The 
resulting residual effects associated with the construction and operation of the pipeline on soil capability 
may include: 

• minor mixing of topsoil and subsoil will likely occur during topsoil salvage, storage and replacement 
activities, including those related to mitigating issues associated with trench instability, shallow topsoil 
depth, poor colour change, and compaction and rutting; 

• some localized undesirable lower subsoils may be unexpectedly encountered and admixed with 
upper subsoil horizons; 

• minor surface erosion of topsoil can be expected until a vegetative cover has been established;  

• revegetation of some disturbed wind erodible soils may be difficult (e.g., soils within the Sounding 
Dunes, Elbow PFRA Community Pasture, Oak Lake Sand Hills and Souris Sand Hills);  

• revegetation of soils saline to the surface may be difficult; 

• stone picking and bedrock slab removal may result in disposal issues and the use of sand as bedding 
and padding material can result in reduced capability of soils adjacent to the trench; 

• pulverization resulting in fugitive dust and loss of soil structure can be expected during dry conditions; 
and 

• minor trench subsidence may occur or a crown over the trench may remain. 

Minor Topsoil / Subsoil Mixing 
During the construction of the pipeline and, to a lesser extent, during maintenance activities, it is likely 
that a minor amount of topsoil and subsoil mixing will occur along all segments of the route. This residual 
effect is confined to the Footprint, reversible in the medium-term and of low magnitude. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-7 
 
 

Minor Undesirable Lower Subsoil / Upper Subsoil Mixing 
Lower subsoils with a high salt or gravel content may be unexpectedly encountered within a localized 
area during construction activities and admixed with upper subsoil horizons exhibiting less salt or gravel 
content. The detailed soil survey will ensure that the three-lift soil handling technique will be implemented 
at most locations to minimize the risk of mixing undesirable lower subsoils with topsoil, thereby 
maintaining the agricultural capability of the soil. This residual effect is confined to the Footprint and of 
low magnitude. 

Minor Surface Erosion 
Construction and maintenance activities which disturb the soil will likely result in some minor surface 
erosion of topsoil until a stable vegetative cover can be established, particularly on slopes which are more 
susceptible to water erosion. It is expected that a vegetative cover can be established on noncultivated 
disturbed slopes within a year, with the application of a quick-catching cover crop in addition to the 
appropriate seed mix for the location. This residual effect is confined to the Footprint, reversible in the 
short to long-term and of low magnitude. 

Revegetation of Wind Erodible Soils 
Due to the origin of the parent material (eolian, glaciofluvial) and sandy texture, some of the soils located 
along the route have a high wind erosion potential when disturbed by short-term construction or 
maintenance activities. This residual effect is confined to the Footprint, reversible in the medium to long-
term and of medium magnitude. 

Highly wind-erodible soils of the Sounding Dunes area in Alberta, the Elbow PFRA Community Pasture in 
Saskatchewan and the Oak Lake Sand Hills and Souris Sand Hills in Manitoba will require increased 
revegetation efforts at these locations. The specialized reclamation measures provided in Detail 6A-50 of 
the Construction and Reclamation Plan (Appendix 6A of this ESA) will result in a stable vegetative cover 
in the medium-term. Post-construction monitoring of the route through these areas will ensure that any 
identified revegetation issues will be remediated in a timely manner. This residual effect is confined to the 
Footprint, reversible in the medium to long-term and of medium magnitude. 

Revegetation of Soils Saline to the Surface 
High salinity of surface soil may hinder revegetation efforts along the proposed route. The seeding of 
appropriate saline tolerant seed mix on noncultivated lands will assist in revegetation of these areas. 
Post-construction monitoring of the route through these areas will ensure that any identified revegetation 
issues will be remediated in a timely manner. No concerns regarding revegetation efforts or crop growth 
on saline soils at the surface were noted in the post-construction monitoring of CEP, Terrace Phases I 
or II (TERA 1995, 1996, 2000, 2001a, 2002, 2003, 2004). Poor growth from KP 509.8 to KP 510.4 
observed during the post-construction monitoring program was attributed to salinity from an old irrigation 
ditch, not pipeline construction. This residual effect is confined to the Footprint, reversible in the short-
term and of low magnitude. 

Stone and Excess Bedrock Disposal 
Picking of stones from the top of the backfilled subsoil and from the topsoil as well as excess bedrock 
removed from the trench by ripping or blasting may result in disposal issues with landowners depending 
on the volume accumulated. In the event that sand to be used for bedding or padding in rocky areas is 
windrowed on unstripped topsoil, reduced soil capability could result. These residual effects are of low 
magnitude. 

Pulverization in Dry Conditions 
Construction activities during dry conditions may result in pulverization of soil and sod along the pipeline 
route which could lead to increased fugitive dust and loss of soil structure. The first-year after post-
construction monitoring report of Terrace Phase II indicated that the mitigative measures implemented 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-8 
 
 

during reclamation activities to minimize erosion associated with pulverized soils (i.e., straw crimping) 
were effective and no erosion was evident (TERA 2002). The reversibility of this residual effect ranges 
from short to medium-term. This residual effect is confined to the Footprint and is of low magnitude. 

Minor Trench Subsidence or Remnant Crown 
Construction activities may result in localized areas of trench subsidence and/or a remnant crown over 
the trench along the route. This residual effect is confined to the Footprint, reversible in the short to 
medium-term and of low magnitude. 

Summary 
Based on Table 6.6 of this ESA, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of 
a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically 
compensated. Consequently, it is concluded that the residual effects of pipeline construction and 
operation on soil capability will be not significant. 

6.2.3 Water Quality and Quantity 

The potential impacts of high water table and withdrawal and release, if conducted, of hydrostatic test 
water (i.e., interbasin water transfer) will be alleviated through the application of mitigative measures (see 
Table 6.2 of this ESA). Potential issues related to aquifer contamination are discussed under Accidents 
and Malfunctions (see Section 6.2.18 and Table 6.2 of this ESA). The resulting potential residual effects 
associated with the construction and operation of the pipeline on water quality and quantity include: 

• minor localized alteration of natural drainage patterns until trench settlement is complete; 

• reduction in surface water quality due to suspended solids during instream construction;  

• although unlikely, the disruption of water well flows may occur; and 

• disruption of shallow groundwater flow where springs are encountered. 

Minor Localized Alteration of Natural Drainage Patterns  
With proper implementation of the mitigation measures proposed, disruption of surface flow patterns 
following construction is likely to be minor along the route. In the event that construction or maintenance 
activities result in changes in surface water regimes, corrective action in consultation with the appropriate 
authorities will be undertaken to resolve the issue. The residual effect is reversible in the short-term and 
of low to medium magnitude. 

Reduction in Surface Water Quality 
The selection of appropriate waterbody crossing techniques and implementation of surface erosion 
controls and riparian vegetation restoration are likely to substantially reduce the potential for adverse 
effects on surface water quality at watercourses crossed by the route. No immediate sedimentation is 
anticipated during the pipeline crossing of a watercourse using an open cut method, since the use of this 
crossing method will generally be confined to those watercourses that are either dry or frozen to the 
bottom of the bed at the time of construction. Similarly, no sedimentation is expected at crossings where 
an HDD can be successfully undertaken since there is no instream construction associated with that 
method. Isolated crossings are proposed for all remaining waterbodies where water is present and 
crossing construction will occur outside of the restricted activity period. During a completely isolated 
crossing, a minor sediment release is expected during installation of the dams prior to the isolation and 
during removal of the dams at the conclusion of the isolation. In addition, minor releases of sediment may 
be associated with the installation and removal of the temporary vehicle crossings. Although elevated 
suspended sediment concentrations may result from instream construction and vehicle crossing use, 
pulses of suspended solids are generally expected to settle out of the water column within the zone of 
influence in a timeframe measuring from minutes to a few hours. Recent evidence demonstrates that 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-9 
 
 

smaller waterbodies that lack substantial subsurface flow can be readily isolated with minimal sediment 
introduction when proper design, construction, and mitigation measures are applied (Reid and Anderson 
2000, CAPP et al. 2005). Consequently, it is anticipated that average total suspended solid (TSS) levels 
during instream construction at these sites will be below the CCME guideline for short-term (24 hour) 
exposure of 25 mg/L above background levels (CCME 1999). Residual effects are reversible in the 
immediate to short-term and of low to medium magnitude. 

An open cut method within flowing water releases more sediment than a completely isolated crossing, 
and measures will be incorporated during crossing design and construction to reduce the magnitude and 
duration of the sediment pulse. A review of the effects of open cut pipeline water crossings over the past 
25 years has indicated that although sediment released during instream construction can cause short-
term changes to downstream aquatic life and their habitats, effects are generally reversible within a year 
of construction (Reid and Anderson 1999). Residual effects on water quality at sites where a trenched 
method within flowing water is to be used are anticipated to be reversible in the short-term and potentially 
of medium to high magnitude. 

Disruption of Water Well Flows 
Disruption of groundwater flows caused by trenching and soil replacement that result in the reduction of 
flow rates in a water well could be of substantial concern to the owner if this is a critical water supply. 
However, the probability of disruption of flows to water wells during construction of the pipeline is low 
considering the proposed burial depth (i.e., 0.9 m typical) and that blasting was not warranted during 
CEP, SEP II, Terrace Phases I or II (IPL 1995, 1998, Enbridge 2000, 2002). Furthermore, the mitigation 
provides for well replacement and, if warranted, the replacement of water of equal or better quality and 
quantity until replaced. Consequently, the residual effect is reversible in the short-term and of low 
magnitude.  

Disruption of Springs 
If springs are encountered along the proposed route, disruption of shallow groundwater flow may occur 
during the short-term construction period. Monitoring of spring flow during construction will detect any 
disruption to flows and measures (e.g., subdrains, trench breakers) will be implemented to restore 
groundwater flow regimes. Alternate water supplies for domestic or livestock use will be provided until the 
flow in the spring is restored. No springs were encountered during the construction of CEP or Terrace 
Phase II (IPL 1995, Enbridge 2002). During construction of Terrace Phase I, springs were only 
encountered at KP 616.0 (Enbridge 2000). No problems were evident at this location during the post-
construction monitoring program in summer 2000 (TERA 2000). This residual effect is reversible in the 
short-term, of low magnitude and low probability. 

Summary 
Based on Table 6.6 of this ESA, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of 
a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically 
compensated. Consequently, it is concluded that the residual effects of pipeline construction and 
operation on water quality or quantity will be not significant. 

6.2.4 Greenhouse Gases and Air Quality 

The potential residual effects (see Table 6.2 of this ESA) associated with the construction and operation 
of the Alberta Clipper pipeline contributing to GHG emissions and on air quality include: 

• incremental increase in the GHG emissions associated with the Enbridge mainline system will occur; 

• increase in vehicle emissions from construction equipment will occur during pipeline construction; 

• increase in dust arising from construction traffic on the right-of-way or access roads; 

• increase in smoke arising from burning of slash will occur; and 

• slight increase in vehicle emissions during maintenance activities. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-10 
 
 

Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
Sources of GHG emissions identified as being associated with Alberta Clipper pipeline for the Project 
include: 

• combustion of fossil fuels associated with pipeline construction activities; and 

• emissions associated with the temporary and longer-term clearing of site vegetation (in particular, 
tree cover) and changes in land-use and vegetative cover. 

An assessment of the direct and indirect incremental GHG emissions associated with the Alberta Clipper 
Project was undertaken by Clearstone Engineering Ltd. (see Appendix I of this ESA). No direct GHG 
emissions were attributed to the proposed operation of the pipeline or pump stations/terminals. 

Construction-related GHG emissions were omitted from the assessment since these are a onetime 
occurrence and would be small compared to ongoing indirect emissions from the operation of the pumps. 
Nevertheless, the amount of GHG emissions associated with construction activities will be minimized by 
utilizing multi-passenger vehicles for the transport of crews to and from job sites to the extent practical. 
Similarly, the emissions associated with clearing of vegetation will be reduced since the proposed route 
largely traverses cleared lands and follows existing rights-of-ways for approximately 98% of its length, 
thereby minimizing the amount of clearing required. 

The residual effect of GHG emissions during pipeline construction is considered to be neutral and, 
consequently, does not require an evaluation of significance. 

Vehicle Equipment Emissions During Construction 
Although nuisance emissions arising from construction equipment will occur along the entire route, the 
residual effect of an increase in vehicle emissions will be limited to areas in proximity to human receptors 
(i.e., permanent residences). This residual effect is reversible in the short-term and, as a result of the 
proposed mitigation measures to minimize air emissions during construction, is of low magnitude. 

Dust During Construction 
With respect to increased dust along the construction right-of-way and unpaved access roads, this 
residual effect is confined to those portions of the pipeline built during relatively dry nonfrozen conditions. 
This residual effect is immediately reversible and, as a result of proposed mitigation measures to 
minimize dust during construction, is of low magnitude. 

Smoke During Construction 
Smoke will be associated with the burning of slash along discrete segments of the proposed route. This 
residual effect is reversible in the short-term and, as a result of proposed mitigation measures outlined in 
Table 6.2 of this ESA, is immediately reversible and of low magnitude. 

Air Emissions During Operations 
The operation of the Alberta Clipper pipeline will not result in any continuous air emissions. However, 
during periodic maintenance activities of immediate to short-term duration, emissions from equipment will 
occur and, depending on the location and season of the work, dust may result during the activity. 
Nevertheless, the residual effect of routine maintenance activities on air quality is anticipated to be of 
limited areal extent, reversible in the short-term and of negligible to low magnitude. 

Summary 
Based on Table 6.6 of this ESA, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of 
a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically 
compensated. Consequently, it is concluded that the residual effects of Alberta Clipper pipeline 
construction and operation on GHG and air quality will be not significant. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-11 
 
 

6.2.5 Acoustic Environment 

The potential residual effects (see Table 6.2 of this ESA) associated with the construction and operation 
of the pipeline on the acoustic environment include: 

• increase in noise will occur during pipeline construction; and 

• slight rise in noise levels will occur during site-specific maintenance activities. 

Noise During Construction 
Noise arising from construction activities is unavoidable and will occur over the entire route. However, the 
residual effect of a short-term increase in noise will be limited to areas in proximity to human receptors 
(i.e., permanent residences, urban areas). The linear progression of pipeline construction results in 
approximately four weeks duration of concentrated construction activity at any given location. Confining 
pipeline activities to adhere to local noise by-laws will also reduce noise concerns in populated areas. The 
residual effect of construction noise on nearby residents is of low magnitude and immediately reversible. 
The effect of construction noise on wildlife is discussed in Section 6.2.9 of this ESA. 

Noise During Operation 
The operation of the pipeline will generally not result in an increase in noise levels over existing levels. 
However, during site-specific periodic maintenance activities of immediate to short-term duration, a slight 
rise in noise will likely occur from vehicles or equipment used during the activity. Nevertheless, the 
residual effect of routine maintenance activities on the acoustic environment is anticipated to be limited in 
areal extent, immediately reversible and of negligible to low magnitude. 

Summary 
Based on Table 6.6 of this ESA, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of 
a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically 
compensated. Consequently, it is concluded that the residual effects of pipeline construction and 
operation on the acoustic environment will be not significant. 

6.2.6 Fish and Fish Habitat 

6.2.6.1 Ecological Context 

Fish populations and aquatic habitat protection in Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba fall under the 
jurisdiction of the federal government through DFO and the Fisheries Act. Most of the watercourses 
crossed by the proposed pipeline route are part of the Saskatchewan River, Qu'Appelle River, Souris 
River, Assiniboine River and Red River drainage basins. There are 93 watercourses crossed by the 
pipeline route. All of these watercourses have been previously crossed during pipeline construction 
projects.  

Two watercourses, one part of the Battle River watershed and the other part of the Sounding Lake basin, 
are crossed by the proposed pipeline route in Alberta. The crossings were deemed to have nil to poor fish 
habitat potential and no fish were captured during field surveys completed for CEP (Environmental 
Management Associates (EMA) 1993) and Terrace Phase II (RL&L 2000). One crossing has an instream 
restricted activity period of April 16 to June 30. The proposed pipeline route in Alberta lies within the 
Parkland-Prairie Fish Management Zone where the fishing season is open from May 19 to March 31. 

Sixty-one watercourses are crossed by the proposed pipeline route in Saskatchewan. They form part of 
the Battle River, Eagle Creek, North and South Saskatchewan River, Upper Qu'Appelle River, Wascana 
Creek, and Upper and Lower Souris River watersheds. Five crossings were identified as having the 
potential for fish habitat concerns with instream restricted activity period of April 1 to May 31. An instream 
restricted activity period of October 1 to May 31 will apply to instream activity (if any) in the South 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-12 
 
 

Saskatchewan River. The remaining crossings require further field investigations in spring/summer 2007. 
A total of nine fish species were documented in Saskatchewan during investigations undertaken for CEP 
(EMA 1993), Terrace Phase I (Golder Associates Ltd. (Golder) 1996, RL&L 1998), the Alliance Pipeline 
Project (Golder 1997), and TransCanada PipeLines Limited 1991 and 1992 and 1993 - 94 Facilities 
Applications (TransCanada PipeLines Limited 1990, 1992). Three species of sport fish (i.e., lake 
whitefish, rainbow trout and walleye) were captured during the surveys. The proposed pipeline route lies 
within the Southern Fishing Zone of Saskatchewan where the fishing season is open from May 6 until 
March 31.  

Thirty watercourses are crossed by the proposed pipeline in Manitoba. They are part of the Assiniboine 
River and Red River watersheds, where channels typically have shallow gradients, low to moderate water 
velocities and meandering course. The Assiniboine River and Red River watersheds support 
approximately 65 and 70 species, respectively. Biophysical information for watercourses crossed by the 
pipeline route in Manitoba is presented in AAR (2007). Eight crossings were deemed to have no fish 
habitat potential, five crossings require further field investigation in spring/summer 2007, eight crossings 
were identified as having the potential for fish habitat concerns with instream restricted activity period of 
April 1 to June 15 and one crossing was identified as having the potential for fish habitat concerns with 
instream restricted activity period of April 1 to July 31. The remaining watercourses with fish habitat 
potential do not have an instream restricted activity period. A total of 22 fish species were documented 
during investigations undertaken for the Southern Lights Project (AAR 2007). Two species of sport fish 
(northern pike and walleye) were captured during the 2006 survey. In addition, one rare species 
(pumpkinseed) was also captured during the 2006 survey. However, this species was introduced into the 
system and, consequently, is not protected under any provincial or federal legislation. The proposed 
pipeline route lies within the Southern Fishing Division of Manitoba where the fishing season is open from 
May 10 until March 31. 

Fish and fish habitat sensitivity are generally highest during spawning and emergence, and other times 
when fish concentrate in spatially restricted habitats. During the spawning and emergence period, fish 
require suitable habitat, and eggs and fry are most likely to be affected by sedimentation. Overwintering 
habitat is often limited to large, deep, isolated pools rather than locations where waterbodies are ice-
covered or frozen to the bottom. 

6.2.6.2 Significance 

The potential residual effects (see Table 6.2 of this ESA) associated with the construction and operation 
of the pipeline on fish and fish habitat include: 

• clearing or disturbance of riparian vegetation within the right-of-way and temporary workspace at 
watercourse crossings will occur; 

• alteration of instream habitat within the zone of influence at trenched crossings will occur;  

• increase in suspended solid concentrations during instream construction at trenched crossings within 
the zone of influence will occur;  

• blockage of fish movement may occur;  

• increased fish and bivalve mortality due to suspended solid concentrations may occur;  

• contamination from spills during construction and operations may occur; and 

• potential fish and bivalve species of concern (i.e., chestnut lamprey, maple leaf mussel, bigmouth 
buffalo) may be affected by increased suspended solid concentration and habitat alteration within the 
zone of influence at select watercourse crossings. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-13 
 
 

Disturbance of Riparian Vegetation 
Riparian vegetation within the right-of-way and temporary workspace will be disturbed at all trenched 
watercourse crossings and watercourses where a temporary vehicle crossing will be installed. Disturbed 
riparian areas will be seeded with the appropriate native seed mix along with a quick establishing cover 
crop. Post-construction monitoring of watercourses along CEP during the one-year after monitoring 
indicated that while all watercourses appeared to be stable, revegetation was incomplete (TERA 1995). 
The problem with revegetation growth was attributed to the lack of moisture early in the 1995 growing 
season and in 1996, under normal soil moisture conditions, the revegetation all watercourses was well-
established (TERA 1996). In addition, post-construction monitoring of watercourses along Terrace 
Phases I and II as well as at Eagle Creek along SEP II, noted that during the one-year after monitoring, 
all watercourse crossings appeared to be stable and vegetation was well-established (TERA 1999, 2000, 
2002). No surface water erosion or revegetation issues at watercourses along the route from KPR 0.0 to 
KPR 23.9 were noted in the post-construction monitoring report for the Alliance Pipeline (TERA 2001b). 
The residual effect of pipeline activities on clearing of vegetation in the riparian area is reversible over the 
medium-term and is of low magnitude. 

Alteration of Instream Habitat 
Habitat alteration in the form of a modified substrate and recontouring of the banks will occur as a result 
of any trenched pipeline crossing. Most of the watercourse crossings along the pipeline route have been 
rated as having nil to low fish habitat potential (see Table 6.3 of this ESA). For those watercourses 
deemed to have low to high potential for fish habitat, the appropriate crossing technique given the 
characteristics of the watercourse, fish species present, instream restricted activity periods and timing of 
construction has been selected to minimize impacts to potential fish habitat (Tables 6.2 and 6.3). The 
implementation of the proposed mitigative measures will minimize the potential for the harmful alteration, 
disruption or destruction of fish or fish habitat (HADD). Nevertheless, compensation will be implemented 
should HADD occur as a result of construction activities at selected watercourses. This residual effect is 
reversible in the short to medium-term and of low magnitude. 

Increased Suspend Solid Concentrations During Instream Construction 
An evaluation of increased suspended solid concentrations during instream construction is provided in 
Water Quality and Quantity in Section 6.2.3 of this ESA. Through the selection of appropriate watercourse 
crossing techniques, vehicle crossing techniques and the implementation of surface erosion controls and 
riparian vegetation restoration as outlined in Table 6.3 of this ESA, the potential for adverse effects on 
aquatic systems along the route due to suspended solids in the water column is greatly reduced. Residual 
effects are reversible in the immediate to short-term and of low to medium magnitude. 

An open cut method within flowing water releases more sediment than a completely isolated crossing, 
and measures will be incorporated during crossing design and construction to reduce the magnitude and 
duration of the sediment pulse. In addition, suspended sediment concentrations will be monitored at these 
locations to confirm that averages remain below the CCME standard of 25 mg/L above background 
(CCME 1999). Residual effects on water quality at sites where a trenched method within flowing water is 
to be used are anticipated to be reversible in the short-term and potentially of medium to high magnitude. 

Blockage of Fish Movements 
The mitigative measures outlined in Tables 6.2 and 6.3 of this ESA will greatly reduce the potential for 
blockage of fish movements by instream construction. The residual effect of the construction of the 
pipeline on blockage of fish movements is considered to be reversible in the short-term and of low 
magnitude. 

Fish and Bivalve Mortality 
With the implementation of mitigative measures outlined in Table 6.2 of this ESA, the likelihood of fish 
mortality arising from an isolated crossing is low. Similarly, no mortality of bivalve species of concern are 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-14 
 
 

anticipated should the contingency measures outlined in the Fish and Bivalve Species of Concern 
Discovery Contingency Plan in Appendix 6B of this ESA be implemented. 

Suspended sediment released at watercourse crossings with fish habitat potential during instream 
activities where water is present (i.e., South Saskatchewan River in the event of an open cut, Qu'Appelle 
River in the event of an isolation, Souris River in the event of a two-stage isolation) could cause 
behavioural or sublethal/lethal effects on fish within the zone of influence. Suspended sediment 
concentrations will be monitored at these crossings to confirm that averages remain below the CCME 
standard of 25 mg/L above background (CCME 1999). This is the level at which mortality of the most 
sensitive life history stage (salmonid fry) has been reported (Newcombe 1994). This residual effect is 
considered to be of low probability. 

Contamination from Spills 
In the event of a large spill such as a fuel truck rollover in a stream, the adverse residual effects could be 
of high magnitude with long lasting ramifications to the health of the stream. Although spill contingency 
and clean-up measures would reduce the magnitude and reversibility of the residual effects, such an 
incident could be considered significant due to the adverse residual effects in a highly sensitive 
environment. Since events such as this rarely occur within the construction right-of-way and even more 
rarely occur instream, the probability of a significant adverse residual effect is low. See also Accidents 
and Malfunctions, Section 6.2.18 of this ESA. 

Fish and Bivalve Species of Concern 
Although the pipeline route lies within the home range of several fish species of concern (i.e., lake 
sturgeon, silver chub, big mouth shiner, chestnut lamprey, bigmouth buffalo), none of these species have 
been found in watercourses crossed by the proposed route during past fish and aquatic habitat surveys 
nor during the survey conducted in fall of 2006. Similarly, although maple leaf mussels have been 
documented at the confluence of the Assiniboine and Souris rivers, none were found in the Souris River 
during the survey in the fall of 2006. Potential effects on these fish and bivalve species and their habitat 
have been reduced by the mitigation and restoration measures summarized in Tables 6.2 and 6.3 of this 
ESA. Should a fish or bivalve species of concern be discovered during additional fish surveys or during 
construction, the implementation of contingency measures outlined in Appendix 6B of this ESA will 
ensure that the residual effects on these species is reduced to a level such that local populations are not 
placed at risk. 

Summary 
Based on Table 6.6 of this ESA, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of 
a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically 
compensated. Consequently, it is concluded that the residual effects of pipeline construction and 
operation on the fish and fish habitat will be not significant. 

6.2.7 Wetlands 

6.2.7.1 Ecological Context 

The proposed pipeline route encounters wetland habitats within the Aspen Parkland and Grassland 
regions of the Continental Prairie Wetland Region. The greatest threat to the health of wetlands in this 
region results from agricultural practices of draining or altering prairie potholes. Agricultural conversion of 
wetlands has been a common practice in the prairies for the past century and it is estimated that only 40-
50% of the original wetlands remain untouched (Leitch 1981). 

Most of the lands along the proposed route abut the existing Enbridge pipeline corridor that has been in 
use by Enbridge since the early 1950s. Previously disturbed wetlands within the local area have proven to 
be resilient and have re-established themselves along the existing pipeline corridor. The most common 
alterations of wetlands have been draining and filling of wetlands during subsequent agricultural practices 
and/or modification to the hydrologic regime. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-15 
 
 

6.2.7.2 Significance 

The proposed pipeline route is designed to avoid impacts on wetlands to the maximum extent feasible. 
However, most of the potential effects associated with the construction and operation of the proposed 
pipeline on wetlands that cannot be avoided will be minimized through the application of mitigative 
measures (see Table 6.2 of this ESA). Potential residual effects associated with the construction of the 
pipeline include: 

• alteration of wetland habitat function; 

• alteration of hydrologic function of wetlands; and 

• alteration of water quality function in wetlands. 

Alteration of Wetland Habitat Function 
Construction and maintenance activities within wetlands along the route will likely result in some minor 
disruption to the habitat function of wetlands. Examples of potential adverse environmental effects on 
wetland habitat function are: potential changes in species composition; stress on rare plant species; 
interruption of wildlife movements; and fragmentation of natural habitats. With proper construction and 
mitigative measures, these adverse effects can be successfully minimized. For example, Zimmerman and 
Wilkey (1992) monitored wetlands for impacts to vegetation for 20-years post-disruption from pipeline 
construction. Findings of these long-term monitoring programs show that: adjacent natural wetland areas 
were not altered in type; no non-native plant species invaded natural areas; and the right-of-way 
increased diversity. Additional studies on wetland vegetation (Shem et al. 1993, Van dyke et al. 1994) 
record the following observations. 

• Wetland community impacts: at most sites, many plants from adjacent natural areas re-establish 
themselves on the right-of-way; and properly constructed rights-of-way appear to have little impact on 
vegetation in the natural areas. 

• Wetland species diversity: often, a greater number of wetland plants are observed on the right-of-way 
than in the adjacent natural area; and rights-of-way increase the number and types of habitats in the 
wetlands. 

• Construction and management practices: vegetative cover on right-of-way sites in wetlands is 
generally well-established within 1-3 years after the pipeline construction. However, minor differences 
in the final right-of-way surface elevation can strongly influence the type of vegetation that re-
establishes on the right-of-way. 

The effects of construction of a natural gas pipeline right-of-way on wetland vegetation and bird 
communities were investigated up to two-years following construction by Santillo (1993). Results showed 
that: at two-years post-construction, wetlands were dominated by native hydrophytic graminoids; there 
was a fairly high similarity of species composition and structure among study wetlands at two-years post 
construction, regardless of wetland type, except for a wetland with standing water; and no new bird 
species were introduced as a result of the different habitat provided by the right-of-way. 

In addition, past construction projects through the pipeline area have successfully minimized impacts to 
wetlands as indicated through the absence of environmental issues pertaining to wetland habitat 
restoration in the As-Built Environmental Report or the first, second and third-year after post-construction 
monitoring reports for CEP and Terrace Phases I and II programs (IPL 1995; Enbridge 2000, 2002; TERA 
1995, 1996, 2000, 2001a, 2002, 2003, 2004). By utilizing the proven and effective mitigative measures 
from past projects in the area, it is anticipated that wetland habitat function along the pipeline route will be 
effectively restored within the short-term. 

Mitigative measures will be employed to minimize the residual effects on wetlands, depending on site-
specific conditions and requirements. With the implementation of the proposed mitigation measures and 
in consideration of past monitoring programs, the potential disruption or alteration of wetland habitat 
function is considered to be reversible in the short-term and of low magnitude. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-16 
 
 

Alteration of Wetland Hydrologic Function  
Potential changes to hydrologic flow (i.e., surface or groundwater flow) of a wetland may include wetland 
drainage, water diversion and natural flow impedance. Excessive wetland drainage or diversion will result 
in an unnatural decrease to wetland area while flow impedance (i.e., inadequate drainage) creates 
wetland habitat. However, each of these alterations is an interruption to the natural hydrologic regime and 
is considered an adverse environmental effect. Among the most important considerations for limiting 
disturbances to hydrologic function is assuring that preconstruction elevations and contours are achieved 
(Gartman 1991) and that there will be no unnatural impedance to flow. Short-term disturbances to 
wetlands are expected during construction of the pipeline. If the right-of-way is restored to its 
preconstruction profile and the bed and bank of all channels are carefully reconstructed, then long-term 
impacts on wetland function are not expected. 

Standard pipeline construction and operational activities are designed to avoid circumstances which 
result in drainage, diversion and/or unnatural retention of water. Terrace Phases I and II are examples of 
the successful implementation of mitigative measures pertaining to wetland hydrologic function. No issues 
related to wetland drainage, diversion or unnatural retention of water on the right-of-way were noted in the 
As-Built Environmental Report or the first, second or third-year after post-construction monitoring reports 
(Enbridge 2000, 2002; TERA 2000, 2001a, 2002, 2003, 2004). By utilizing the proven and effective 
mitigative measures from past projects in the area, it is anticipated that wetland hydrologic function along 
the pipeline route will be effectively restored within the short-term. 

Consequently, the residual effect of the pipeline on wetland hydrology is reversible in the short-term and 
of low magnitude. 

Alteration of Wetland Water Quality Function 
Activity in or near wetlands during pipeline construction along the proposed route may result in an 
increased sediment supply and turbidity of surface waters thereby decreasing overall water quality 
function. Other possible impacts to water quality include the potential for loss of groundwater quality as a 
result of interference with shallow (within trench depth) groundwater movement, changes to nutrient 
levels due to flow impedance from an active river channel and, in the event of a major fuel spill from a 
piece of equipment or fuel truck, infiltration into surficial deposits and the near surface groundwater are 
probable. 

Mitigative measures will be employed during construction and maintenance activities to ensure that all 
practical measures will be utilized to minimize impacts on water quality in wetlands. With the 
implementation of these measures, the residual effects of the pipeline on wetland water quality are 
considered to be of low magnitude and reversible in the short-term. 

Summary 
Based on Table 6.6 of this ESA, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of 
a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically 
compensated. Consequently, it is concluded that the residual effects of pipeline construction and 
operation on wetlands and wetland function will be not significant. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-17 
 
 

6.2.8 Vegetation 

6.2.8.1 Ecological Context 

Previous disturbances of native vegetation in the vicinity of the pipeline route have included clearing and 
breaking of native prairie and wooded areas for agricultural purposes since the late 1880s to present. 
Development of road and rail transportation networks from the late 1880s to present has also 
substantially affected native vegetation. 

It has been estimated that 90% of the native landscapes on the Canadian prairies have been altered, 
primarily by agricultural activities (Grilz and Romo 1995). Native vegetation in the Mixed Grassland, Moist 
Mixed Grassland, Boreal Transition and Lake Manitoba Plain ecoregions is generally limited to wetlands, 
major river valleys, and stream channels as well as areas with soils or topography unsuitable for 
agricultural use. Improved pasture, which often contains elements of native plant communities, also forms 
a part of the landscape. The Aspen Parkland ecoregion contains very productive agricultural soils and 
native vegetation is generally limited to areas where topography is not favourable for cultivation. 

From the 1950s to present, Enbridge has constructed several pipelines that the proposed pipeline 
parallels for almost its entire length. Clearing, grading, soils handling, trenching and revegetation efforts 
during construction and operation of the existing pipelines have affected native vegetation along the 
route. 

The relationship of native vegetation with other ecosystem components is that it provides protection of: 
gene pools for future use; protection of native plant and wildlife species and their habitats; preservation of 
climax ecosystems and native biodiversity; and conservation of representative samples of different 
habitats characteristic of the region. Areas of remnant native vegetation are also economically important 
to the agricultural community since they provide grazing lands for livestock. 

6.2.8.2 Significance 

The potential residual effects on vegetation (see Table 6.2 of this ESA) associated with construction and 
operation of the pipeline include: 

• alteration of approximately 390 ha of native vegetation, including 220 ha of native prairie; 

• if mitigative measures do not completely protect the site, some loss or alteration of the local 
population of S1, S2 and/or S3 rare vascular plants may occur; 

• transplanted or propagated rare vascular plant specimens may not survive; 

• if the sensitive plant community cannot be avoided and access restrictions and temporarily covering 
the site do not completely protect the community, then a narrow strip of the community will be 
disturbed resulting in some loss or alteration of the community; 

• alteration of approximately 607 ha of vegetation important to wildlife; 

• weed introduction and spread may occur; and 

• ornamental trees, wind breaks or shelterbelts may be removed as a result of construction activities. 

The potential residual effects associated with revegetation of high wind erosion potential soils including 
dune sands and other soils within the Sounding Dunes, Elbow PFRA Community Pasture, Oak Lake 
Sand Hills and Souris Sand Hills, of soils saline to the surface, and of saline upper soils are discussed in 
Section 6.2.2 of this ESA. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-18 
 
 

Alteration of Native Vegetation 
The proposed route follows existing rights-of-ways for approximately 98% of its length, maximizing the 
use of previously disturbed areas and minimizing the total amount of disturbance. Approximately 390 ha 
of native vegetation consisting of 220 ha of native prairie and 170 ha of bush and bush-pasture will be 
disturbed or cleared during construction of the pipeline. These figures are a conservative estimate since 
they include lands that formed temporary workspace of previous pipeline construction and would have 
been previously cleared or disturbed. Disturbed areas through native vegetation segments will be seeded 
with the appropriate native seed mix. No locally or regionally adopted threshold or standard exists against 
which the incremental change in vegetation composition can be judged. This residual effect is limited to 
the Footprint, reversible in the medium to long-term and of low to medium magnitude. 

Rare Vascular Plant Species of Concern 
Protection measures and environmental management techniques for rare plants will be based on site-
specific conditions and species sensitivity criteria. Final decisions on mitigative measures will be made by 
Enbridge in consultation with botanical experts, ANHIC, SK CDC, MB CDC and where appropriate, the 
land authority. Mitigative measures for vascular plant species of concern are outlined in Detail 6B-1 of the 
Plant Species of Concern Discovery Contingency Plan (see Appendix 6B of this ESA) and generally fall 
into categories of avoidance, minimizing disturbance and alternative reclamation techniques. These 
proposed mitigative measures have been used previously on other major pipeline construction projects 
with good success. Following are some examples. 

Indian grass (Sorghastrum nutans) was found south of the Terrace Phase I right-of-way at KP 1005.0. 
During construction, the Indian grass was flagged and avoided (Enbridge 2000).  

Narrowing down of the right-of-way was undertaken at several locations during construction of the 
Alliance Pipeline Project in 1999. For example, in central Alberta, Douglas hawthorn (Crataegus 
douglasii) (S3W) was fenced and the right-of-way narrowed down. During post-construction monitoring in 
summer 2000, the Douglas hawthorn was thriving and showed no signs of impact due to construction 
(Fryer et al. 2002). 

During construction of the Alliance Pipeline in central Alberta, disturbance of low milkweed (Asclepias 
ovalifolia) (S2) was avoided by extending the length of a bore of the highway, railway and creek that were 
in the vicinity of the rare plant (Alliance Pipeline Limited Partnership (Alliance) 2000a). 

Turned sedge (Carex retrorsa) (S2S3) was found on the Alliance Pipeline near Whitecourt (Alliance 
2000b). The area was ramped over by cutting and laying down willows, covering them with geotextile, 
and then ramping with subsoil. Upon completion of construction, the ramp was removed. During post-
construction monitoring in 2001, the plant was found in very large numbers both on and off the right-of-
way (Alliance 2002).  

Few-flowered aster (Aster pauciflorus) (S3) and lotus flowered milk-vetch (Astragalus lotiflorus) (S2S3) 
were found along the proposed Terrace Phase I route. Both plants were transplanted to a similar habitat 
off of the right-of-way using hand methods or a backhoe prior to construction in 1998. The transplanted 
few-flowered aster and lotus flowered milk vetch were observed alive and thriving during post-
construction monitoring in the summer of 2000 and 2001 (TERA 2000, 2001a). 

In order to protect sand millet (Panicum wilcoxianum) (S1) during construction of Terrace Phase II in 
2001, the work site was narrowed by ~5 m, no grading was allowed and a blade width of sod was 
salvaged and placed on straw matting. The sod was then replaced and straw from the matting was then 
spread over the replaced sod. During post-construction monitoring in 2004, approximately 3,000 sand 
millet plants were found (TERA 2004). 

During construction of CEP in 1994, seed from sand nutgrass (Cyperus schweinitzii) (S2) in the Hardisty, 
Alberta area was collected and stratified for dispersal following construction. During the post-construction 
monitoring program, numerous sand nutgrass plants were found where the collected seed was sown (IPL 
1995, Fryer pers. comm.). The site was revisited yearly for several years after construction and the sand 
nutgrass was thriving (Fryer pers. comm.). 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-19 
 
 

Based on the assessment of the rare vascular plants that will be encountered during construction, the 
proven mitigative measures described above are considered to be appropriate and applicable to the 
vascular species encountered by the pipeline route. However, if mitigative measures do not completely 
protect the site, a loss or alteration of a portion of the local population of S1, S2, and/or S3 rare vascular 
plants may occur. By basing mitigation on species ranking, abundance, growth habit and habitat, in 
addition to its location on the right-of-way, any loss or alteration of the local rare plant population, 
particularly S1 local populations, would be reduced to a level such that the local population is not placed 
at risk. Consequently, the residual effects of the construction of the pipeline on rare vascular plant 
species are reversible in the short to medium-term and of medium magnitude. 

Sensitive Plant Communities 
Protection measures and environmental management techniques for sensitive plant communities will be 
based on site-specific conditions and species sensitivity criteria. Final decisions on mitigative measures 
will be made by Enbridge in consultation with botanical experts, ANHIC, SK CDC, MB CDC and where 
appropriate, the land authority. Mitigative measures for sensitive plant communities are outlined in Detail 
6B-1 of the Plant Species of Concern Discovery Contingency Plan (see Appendix 6B of this ESA).  

The mitigative measures proposed in Detail 6B-1 (Appendix 6B of this ESA) have been used successfully 
on other major pipeline construction projects. For example, narrowing down of the right-of-way for 
sensitive communities was successfully done during construction at several locations on the Alliance 
Pipeline Project (Alliance 2000a,b,c). At the South Saskatchewan River, shrubby vegetation important for 
wildlife was temporarily covered with geotextile pads during construction (Alliance 2000c). In addition, 
sensitive grasslands with thorny buffaloberry (Shepherdia argentea), considered important for wildlife, 
was ramped over during construction. The thorny buffaloberry was cut low to the ground and the root mat 
preserved (Alliance 2000c).  

Covering the rare plant community with geotextile or ramping over the community are measures that will 
be easier to undertake during construction in frozen conditions when the plants are dormant and snow 
can be used to protect the vegetation. 

The mitigative measures described above are considered to be appropriate and applicable to the 
proposed pipeline. However, if the plant community cannot be avoided, then a narrowed strip of the S1, 
S2 or S3 community will be disturbed resulting in some loss or alteration of the community. In addition, 
temporarily covering of the site and implementing construction traffic restrictions may not completely 
protect the community. By basing mitigation on community ranking and abundance, in addition to its 
location on the right-of-way and the community type, any loss or alteration of the local community, 
particularly S1 local communities, will be reduced to a level such that the local community is not placed at 
risk. Consequently, the residual effects of the pipeline on rare plant communities are confined to the 
Footprint or the LSA, are reversible in the medium to long-term and of medium magnitude. 

Alteration of Vegetation Important to Wildlife 
The proposed route follows existing rights-of-ways for approximately 98% of its length, maximizing the 
use of previously disturbed areas and minimizing the total amount of disturbance. Approximately 607 ha 
of vegetation important to wildlife (i.e., pasture, bush-pasture, bush and native prairie) will be altered as a 
result of construction of the pipeline. These figures are a conservative estimate since they include lands 
that formed temporary workspace of previous pipeline construction and may have been previously 
cleared or disturbed. Disturbed areas through native vegetation or pasture segments will be seeded with 
the appropriate native or agronomic seed mix unless otherwise requested by the landowner. No locally or 
regionally adopted threshold or standard exists against which the incremental change in vegetation 
composition can be judged. This residual effect is limited to the Footprint, reversible in the short to long-
term and of low magnitude. 

Weeds 
Several locations of weed infestations were noted along the route from KP 959.3 to KP 1245.2 during the 
vegetation reconnaissance conducted in fall 2006. A preconstruction weed survey will be conducted in 
2007 along the entire proposed pipeline route (see Section 9.0 of this ESA). Mitigative measures outlined 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-20 
 
 

in Table 6.2 of this ESA are proven and effective industry standard measures to minimize the introduction 
and spread of weeds. Past experience during construction programs along the route have revealed that, 
while weed infestations were encountered, the implementation of appropriate mitigative measures during 
construction resulted in limited weed issues (IPL 1995, Enbridge 2000, 2002). Furthermore, as noted in 
the post-construction monitoring reports, all weed issues along the proposed route were resolved at the 
end of the first-year after post-construction monitoring program for Alliance Pipeline (TERA 2001b), at the 
end of the second-year after post-construction monitoring program for CEP and Terrace Phase I (TERA 
1996, 2001a) and at the end of the third-year after post-construction monitoring program for Terrace 
Phase II (TERA 2004). It is anticipated that weed introduction and spread arising from the construction of 
the pipeline will be limited in areal extent, reversible in the short to medium-term and of low magnitude. 

Ornamental Trees, Windbreaks and Shelterbelts 
During past construction programs along the route, the construction right-of-way generally was narrowed 
at shelterbelt locations to minimize the number of trees to be removed or the shelterbelt was bored (IPL 
1995, Enbridge 2000). Landowners will be consulted with regard to ornamental trees, windbreaks and 
shelterbelts on their property potentially being affected by construction activities. Some of these features 
may be removed as a result of the construction of the pipeline. However, considering that such removal 
would have the approval of the landowner, this residual effect is considered to be neutral and, 
consequently, does not require an evaluation of significance. 

Summary 
Based on Table 6.6 of this ESA, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of 
a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically 
compensated. Consequently, it is concluded that the residual effects of pipeline construction and 
operation on vegetation will be not significant. 

6.2.9 Wildlife 

6.2.9.1 Ecological Context 

In Alberta and Saskatchewan, the proposed pipeline route traverses habitats within the Aspen Parkland 
and Moist Mixed Grassland Ecoregions. In Saskatchewan, the proposed route also traverses habitats 
within the Mixed Grassland Ecoregion. In Manitoba, the proposed pipeline route traverses habitats within 
the Aspen Parkland, Manitoba Plain, and Boreal Transition Ecoregions. 

Most of the lands along the proposed route abut the existing Enbridge pipeline corridor that has been in 
use by Enbridge since the early 1950s. Existing disturbances arising predominantly from agricultural 
activities within the local area have resulted in direct habitat losses and alterations in the past. 

Habitat for many of the wildlife species in the vicinity of the pipeline route generally coincides with areas 
of native vegetation. The loss of native vegetation within the vicinity of the pipeline route directly affects 
use of native habitats by wildlife and the location, distribution, and viability of many species at risk. Some 
wildlife species have also adapted to, or acclimated to various levels of human activity. 

6.2.9.2 Significance 

The potential residual effects on wildlife and wildlife habitat (see Table 6.2 of this ESA) associated with 
construction and operation of the pipeline include: 

• alteration of 607 ha of wildlife habitat including habitat within DU project areas, CAs, NAWMP priority 
areas, PFRA community pastures, WHPA lands, Kendal Game Preserve lands, and Fish and Game 
Development Fund areas; 

• displacement of wildlife away from the pipeline route during construction with resultant use of 
potentially suboptimal habitat during noncritical periods;  



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-21 
 
 

• potential for vehicle/wildlife collisions on access roads and along the right-of-way during construction; 
and 

• potential for mortality due to the physical disturbance of undiscovered nests, burrows, dens or other 
localized habitat on the right-of-way. 

Alteration of Wildlife Habitat 
The proposed route follows existing rights-of-ways for approximately 98% of its length, maximizing the 
use of previously disturbed areas and minimizing the total amount of disturbance. Approximately 607 ha 
of wildlife habitat (i.e., pasture, bush-pasture, bush and native prairie) will be altered as a result of 
construction of the pipeline including habitat within DU project areas, CAs, NAWMP priority areas, PFRA 
community pastures, WHPA lands, Kendal Game Preserve lands, and Fish and Game Development 
Fund areas. This figure is a conservative estimate since it includes lands that formed temporary 
workspace of previous pipeline construction and may have been previously cleared or disturbed. 
Disturbed areas through native vegetation and pasture segments will be seeded with the appropriate 
native or agronomic seed mix unless otherwise requested by the landowner. No locally or regionally 
adopted threshold or standard exists against which the incremental change in vegetation composition can 
be judged. This residual effect is limited to the Footprint, reversible in the short to long-term and of low 
magnitude. 

Sensory Disturbance of Wildlife 
Noise arising during the construction of the pipeline may displace wildlife in the vicinity of the right-of-way. 
However, scheduling construction activities outside of the peak breeding season will substantially 
minimize the potential to disturb wildlife species during their sensitive life history phases. Due to the linear 
progression of pipeline construction, construction at any given location along the route will be limited to 
approximately one month and, therefore, is of short-term duration. This residual effect is of low magnitude 
and of short-term reversibility. 

Wildlife Mortality 
Although vehicle speed will be limited on the roads to the pipeline right-of-way as well as on the right-of-
way (see Traffic Control Plan in Appendix 6C of this ESA), a slight increase in potential for vehicle/wildlife 
collisions may occur during the construction and, to a lesser extent, during the operation of the pipeline. 
In addition, no vehicle/wildlife collisions during the construction of Terrace Phases I or II were noted in the 
As-built reports (Enbridge 2000, 2002). Consequently, the probability of such a collision is low. 

Similarly, the application of mitigative measures from Table 6.2 of this ESA regarding pre-construction 
wildlife surveys and measures to be taken during construction to reduce the potential for wildlife mortality 
(e.g., removing trapped animals from the trench) will substantially reduce the potential of wildlife mortality 
associated with the construction of the pipeline. 

Summary 
Based on Table 6.6 of this ESA, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of 
a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically 
compensated. Consequently, it is concluded that the residual effects of pipeline construction and 
operation on wildlife and wildlife habitat will be not significant. 

6.2.10 Species at Risk 

The potential residual effects on species at risk (see Table 6.2 of this ESA) associated with construction 
and operation of the pipeline include: 

• potential fish species at risk may be affected by increased suspended sediment concentration and 
habitat alteration within the zone of influence at select watercourse crossings; 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-22 
 
 

• if mitigative measures do not completely protect the site, some loss or alteration of the local 
population of S1, S2 and/or S3 vascular plant species at risk may occur; and 

• alteration of habitat used by wildlife species of concern, including northern leopard frogs, loggerhead 
shrike and long-billed curlew as well as sensory disturbance and potential mortality during 
construction if mitigative measures cannot protect some individuals. 

Fish Species at Risk 
Although the pipeline route in eastern Saskatchewan and Manitoba lies within the home range of a fish 
species at risk (i.e., silver chub), this species has not been found in watercourses crossed by the 
proposed route during past fish and aquatic habitat surveys nor during the survey conducted in fall of 
2006. Potential effects on fish species at risk and their habitat have been reduced by the mitigation and 
restoration measures summarized in Tables 6.2 and 6.3 of this ESA. Should a fish species at risk be 
discovered during additional fish surveys or during construction, the implementation of contingency 
measures outlined in Appendix 6B of this ESA will ensure that the residual effects on these species is 
reduced to a level such that local populations are not placed at risk. 

Vascular Plant Species at Risk 
Although the pipeline route in Saskatchewan and Manitoba lies within the home range of five vascular 
plant species at risk (i.e., buffalo grass, slender mouse-ear cress, hairy prairie-clover, western spiderwort 
and small white lady's slipper), these species have not been found along the proposed route during past 
vegetation surveys. Potential effects on vascular plant species at risk and their habitat have been reduced 
by the mitigation and restoration measures summarized in Table 6.2 of this ESA. Should a vascular plant 
species at risk be discovered during additional vegetation surveys, the implementation of contingency 
measures outlined in Appendix 6B of this ESA will ensure that the residual effects on these species is 
reduced to a level such that local populations are not placed at risk. 

Wildlife Species at Risk 
Although the pipeline route lies within the home range of 14 wildlife species at risk, only four of these 
species (i.e., northern leopard frog, loggerhead shrike, long-billed curlew and burrowing owl) have been 
identified using habitat along the proposed route or within the setback distance of the proposed route 
during past wildlife surveys. 

Northern leopard frogs are considered species of Special Concern under SARA in Alberta, Saskatchewan 
and Manitoba. This species has been rated as S2S3 (imperilled to vulnerable) in Alberta, S3 (vulnerable) 
in Saskatchewan and S4 (apparently secure) in Manitoba. The population of northern leopard frogs is 
increasing and stable. During past wildlife surveys along the proposed route, northern leopard frogs were 
previously identified in Saskatchewan and Manitoba from KP 655.0 and KP 656.0, from KP 988 and 
KP 993 and at the Souris River (KP 1073.4) as well as in the vicinity of the Cypress River (KP 1131.6) 
and at Deadhorse Creek (KP 1196.6). No leopard frogs or their habitat have been identified along the 
proposed route in Alberta during past wildlife surveys or during past construction programs. During 
construction of Terrace Phase I, northern leopard frogs were encountered only in Manitoba from KP 988 
to KP 993 and at the Souris River (Enbridge 2000). In excess of two hundred northern leopard frogs were 
removed from the construction right-of-way prior to the initiation of activities resulting in minimal impacts. 
Provincial authorities in Manitoba determined at the time that no additional mitigative measures were 
required (Enbridge 2000). During consultation with Manitoba Conservation and Environment Canada 
representatives for the Alberta Clipper Project, the northern leopard frog was deemed to be of no concern 
to these agencies (Chranowski, Moran, Duncan pers. comm.). Potential effects on this species and its 
habitat will be reduced by the mitigation and restoration measures summarized in Table 6.2 of this ESA. 
Should northern leopard frogs be identified during additional studies in 2007 or during construction, the 
implementation of contingency measures will reduce the effects on this species to a level such that the 
local populations are not placed at risk. Consequently, the residual effects of the construction of the 
pipeline on northern leopard frogs are reversible in the short to medium-term and of low to medium 
magnitude. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-23 
 
 

Loggerhead shrikes are considered a Threatened species under SARA in Alberta, Saskatchewan and 
Manitoba. This species has been rated as S3B (vulnerable) in Alberta, S4B (apparently secure) in 
Saskatchewan and S3S4B (apparently secure to vulnerable) in Manitoba. The population of loggerhead 
shrikes have been declining, particularly in Saskatchewan and Manitoba. During past wildlife surveys 
along the proposed route, loggerhead shrikes and their habitat have been previously identified at several 
locations. Impacts on loggerhead shrikes were minimized through scheduling of construction to avoid 
sensitive spring nesting, narrowing down the right-of-way or boring to avoid site-specific habitat (e.g., 
thorny buffaloberry shrubs) (Enbridge 2000). Potential effects on this species and its habitat will be 
reduced by the mitigation and restoration measures summarized in Table 6.2 of this ESA. Should 
loggerhead shrikes be identified during additional studies in 2007 or during construction, the 
implementation of contingency measures will reduce the effects on this species to a level such that the 
local populations are not placed at risk. Consequently, the residual effects of the construction of the 
pipeline on loggerhead shrikes are reversible in the short to medium-term and of low to medium 
magnitude.  

Long-billed curlew are considered species of Special Concern under SARA in Alberta and Saskatchewan. 
This species has been rated as S3B (vulnerable) in Alberta and S4B (apparently secure) in 
Saskatchewan. The number of breeding long-bill curlews has been relatively stable over the past 10 
years. Although long-billed curlew habitat has been identified from KP 560.4 to KP 566.3, no nesting long-
bill curlews have been identified along the proposed route or within setback distances to the route during 
past wildlife surveys. Potential effects on this species and its habitat will be reduced by the mitigation and 
restoration measures summarized in Table 6.2 of this ESA. Should long-billed curlews be identified during 
additional studies in 2007 or during construction, the implementation of contingency measures would 
reduce the effects on these species to a level such that the local populations are not placed at risk. 
Consequently, the residual effects of the construction of the pipeline on long-billed curlews are reversible 
in the short to medium-term and of low magnitude. 

Although burrowing owls are considered an Endangered species under SARA in Alberta, Saskatchewan 
and Manitoba, the proposed route lies within the range of this species in only Alberta and Saskatchewan. 
This species has been rated as S2B (imperilled) in Alberta and in S1B (critically imperilled) in 
Saskatchewan. The population of burrowing owls is declining. Although no burrowing owls have been 
recorded along the route or in the vicinity of the route in Alberta, the proposed route lies within the 
setback distance to several historic burrowing owl records in Saskatchewan. During construction of CEP, 
22 artificial burrowing owl nest boxes were installed in the vicinity of the right-of-way. Potential effects on 
this species and its habitat will be reduced by the mitigation and restoration measures summarized in 
Table 6.2 of this ESA. Should burrowing owls be identified during additional studies in 2007 or during 
construction, the implementation of contingency measures would reduce the effects on these species to a 
level such that the local populations are not placed at risk. Consequently, the residual effects of the 
construction of the pipeline on burrowing owls are reversible in the short to medium-term and of medium 
magnitude. 

Should other wildlife species of concern be identified during additional studies in 2007 or during 
construction, the implementation of contingency measures will reduce the effects on the species to a level 
such that the local populations are not placed at risk. Consequently, the combined residual effects of the 
construction of the pipeline on wildlife species at risk are reversible in the short to medium-term and of 
low to medium magnitude. 

Summary 
Based on Table 6.6 of this ESA, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of 
a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically 
compensated. Consequently, it is concluded that the residual effects of pipeline construction and 
operation on species at risk will be not significant. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-24 
 
 

6.2.11 Human Occupancy and Resource Use 

The potential residual effects on human occupancy and resource use (see Table 6.2 of this ESA) 
associated with construction and operation of the pipeline includes: 

• disruption of ranching and farming operations, including irrigation activities, may occur during pipeline 
construction; 

• disruption of grazing activities on PFRA / community pasture lands and grazing leases may occur 
during pipeline construction;  

• disruption of local hunting and guide outfitting activities may occur during pipeline construction; 

• the navigability of watercourses deemed to be a navigable waterway may be affected during pipeline 
construction;  

• disruption of golfing activities may occur during pipeline construction;  

• disruption of recreational activities at Kemoca Regional Park during pipeline construction; 

• alteration of lands along the proposed route within the Sounding-Sunken Environmentally Significant 
Area will occur; and 

• a decrease in the quality of the outdoor recreation experience may occur at select locations during 
pipeline construction. 

Disruption of Ranching and Farming Operations 
Ranchers and farmers along the route may experience disruptions to their activities during the short-term 
duration of construction of the pipeline. Scheduling of the pipeline component outside of peak agricultural 
activity periods, including peak irrigation period, where feasible, will lessen the effects on ranchers and 
farmers. Furthermore, advanced notification of the pipeline activity schedule to all affected ranchers and 
farmers, and compensation for disrupted activities and crop loss will further minimize these effects. It is 
anticipated that the construction of the pipeline will not affect the sustainability of ranching and farming 
activities in the vicinity of the pipeline route nor the livelihood of the local rancher or farmer. The residual 
effect is reversible in the short-term and of low to medium magnitude. 

Disruption of Grazing Activities on PFRA / Community Pasture Lands and Grazing Leases 
Grazing activities within PFRA pastures, community pastures and grazing leases along the route may be 
disrupted during the short-term duration of construction of the pipeline. Scheduling of the pipeline 
component outside of peak grazing periods, where feasible, will lessen the effects on landowners or land 
managers. Furthermore, advanced notification of the pipeline activity schedule to the landowners or land 
managers may result in moving cattle to other portions of the PFRA pasture, community pasture or 
grazing lease during construction, thereby further lessening the effect on the operation of the pasture. 
The residual effect is reversible in the short-term and of low to medium magnitude. 

Disturbance of Hunting and Guide Outfitting Activities 
The proposed route is located in an agricultural setting on predominately private lands where hunting is 
only allowed with the permission of the landowner. The effect of the construction of the pipeline on 
hunting activities will be negligible for segments of the route constructed during winter and summer. 
However, local hunters and guide outfitters may experience some minor disturbance of their activities 
along segments of the route constructed during autumn. The residual effect is reversible in the short-term 
and of negligible to low magnitude. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-25 
 
 

Navigable Waters 
For past construction programs along the Enbridge system from Hardisty to the US border near Gretna, 
six watercourses were deemed to be a navigable watercourse, namely Eagle Creek, the South 
Saskatchewan River, the Qu'Appelle River, Wascana Creek, Chapleau Lake and the Souris River. 
Enbridge will follow all permit conditions for these watercourses and any other watercourses deemed 
navigable by Transport Canada. The navigability of some watercourses along the route may be affected if 
open water conditions occur during construction of a trenched crossing or installation of a temporary 
vehicle crossing. With advanced public notification of affected watercourses through the placement of 
notices in the local and regional newspapers and on radios, along with the installation of signs at boat 
launches and measures to be implemented during instream construction, the residual effect on 
recreational use of navigable waters is immediately reversible and of low magnitude. 

Disturbance of Golfing Activities 
Golfers using the three golf courses traversed by the pipeline route may experience disruptions to their 
activities during the short-term duration of construction of the pipeline. If feasible, scheduling of the 
pipeline component until after fall closure of the golf course will lessen the effects on these local 
businesses. Furthermore, compensation for disrupted activities will further minimize these effects. The 
residual effect is reversible in the short-term and of negligible to medium magnitude. 

Disruption of Activities Within the Kemoca Regional Park 
An Urban Construction Plan for Kemoca Regional Park (KP 791.5 to KP 791.8 and KP 792.3 to KP 792.7) 
will be prepared to minimize disturbance to the park and its users. If feasible, scheduling of the pipeline 
component during fall or winter will lessen the effects on the park users. Furthermore, compensation for 
disrupted activities will further minimize these effects. The residual effect is reversible in the short-term 
and of negligible to medium magnitude. 

Sounding-Sunken Environmentally Significant Area 
The proposed route from KP 217.5 to KP 230.9 traverses the Sounding-Sunken Environmentally 
Significant Area. In Alberta, the delineation of environmentally significant areas has been conducted on 
behalf of the municipal agencies and, in some cases, provincial authorities, to assist in planning 
development in the respective areas. Lands designated as environmentally significant areas do not have 
development restrictions placed upon them. The environmentally significant areas designation is, 
however, intended to guide proposed developments in an appropriate manner. Through the mitigation 
noted in Table 6.2 of this ESA, including plant and wildlife surveys, and appropriate reclamation 
measures, the magnitude of the alteration of lands through the Sounding-Sunken Environmentally 
Significant Area is considered to be low. 

Outdoor Recreational Experiences 
Outdoor recreational experiences such as wildlife viewing and fishing may be affected by noise and visual 
disturbances associated with the construction of the pipeline during nonfrozen conditions. The proposed 
mitigation measures will restrict the amount of dust and noise associated with the construction of the 
pipeline. This residual effect is of negligible to low magnitude and is immediately reversible. 

Summary 
Based on Table 6.6 of this ESA, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of 
a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically 
compensated. Consequently, it is concluded that the residual effects of pipeline construction and 
operation on human occupancy and resource use will be not significant. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-26 
 
 

6.2.12 Heritage Resources 

The potential residual effects on heritage resources (see Table 6.2 of this ESA) associated with 
construction and operation of the pipeline include: 

• identified surface and burial sites may be disturbed during construction; 

• previously unidentified buried heritage resources may be disturbed during construction; and 

• palaeontological resources may be disturbed as a result of construction activities. 

Disturbance of Heritage Resource Sites 
Heritage resources provide a window into past human experiences and by their very nature, are non-
renewable and once disturbed the resource may be altered or even lost. Consequently, the primary 
mitigative measure in protecting heritage resources is avoidance. Yet, to further the understanding of the 
past, disturbing the cultural resources through excavations is an acceptable practice for archaeologists 
and, in many cases, the only method to collect in situ information to add to the archaeological record. 
Regardless of whether the excavation of the site is for academic or development purposes, the loss of 
heritage resource sites is generally offset by the recovery of knowledge about the site gained through 
meticulous identifying, cataloguing, and preserving of artifacts and features. 

A total of 101 previously identified heritage resources have been identified in the vicinity of the proposed 
route. Some sites will be avoided by narrowing down the construction right-of-way or fencing off the 
feature. The Thornhill Mounds site will be investigated in spring 2007 to ensure that the proposed route 
avoids this high value heritage resource site. 

Should any heritage resources be discovered during the HRIAs in Alberta and Saskatchewan and the site 
investigations in Manitoba scheduled for spring 2007, appropriate mitigative measures will be selected 
from the Heritage Resources Discovery Contingency Plan in Appendix 6B of this ESA so that the 
magnitude of the loss of heritage sites, if any, is low. At some locations, no special mitigation will be 
warranted and at some sites that cannot be avoided, the site will be thoroughly documented. The 
magnitude of the loss of these heritage sites is low. Furthermore, the knowledge gained from such 
documentation is viewed as adequately compensating for impacts to heritage resources. 

No previously undiscovered heritage resources were identified during construction of CEP, SEP II, 
Terrace Phase I or Phase II (IPL 1995, 1998; Enbridge 2000, 2002). Consequently, the probability of 
discovering a previously undiscovered heritage resource during construction of the pipeline is considered 
to be low. Nevertheless, should any previously unidentified buried sites be encountered during 
construction of the pipeline, activity at that site will be stopped and contingency measures outlined the 
Heritage Resource Discovery Contingency Plan (Appendix 6B of this ESA) will be implemented. Since 
knowledge of the site will be recovered prior to resumption of construction activity, the addition of 
information to the archaeological record is viewed as generally compensating for the loss of heritage 
resources and magnitude is considered to be low. 

Discovery of Palaeontological Resources 
Past studies of the Enbridge corridor associated with CEP, SEP II, Terrace Phases I and II did not identify 
any palaeontological resources within the Footprint. In addition, no palaeontological resources were 
identified along the Alliance Pipeline route. No palaeontological resources were discovered during the 
construction of CEP, SEP II, Terrace Phases I or II (IPL 1995, 1998; Enbridge 2000, 2002). 
Consequently, the probability of encountering palaeontological resources along the route is considered 
low. 

A palaeontological assessment of the valleys of High Hill, Cottonwood and Deadhorse creeks will be 
undertaken during spring 2007. If there is a high likelihood of encountering palaeontological resources, 
the construction of the pipeline may allow for the unique opportunity to advance the understanding of the 
palaeontological history of the area through monitoring of trenching activities at this location. Should the 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-27 
 
 

palaeontologist monitor discover palaeontological resources during trenching activities along these 
segments, work at that location will cease and samples will be taken under the direction of the 
palaeontologist, after which, trenching activities will resume. These segments of the route have the 
potential to add to the knowledge base if palaeontological resources are identified and samples recovered 
during construction for data analysis. The potential to contribute to the understanding of the regional 
palaeontological resources as a result of the construction of the pipeline is a positive residual effect and, 
consequently, does not require an evaluation of significance. 

Summary 
Based on Table 6.6 of this ESA, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of 
a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically 
compensated. Consequently, it is concluded that the residual effects of pipeline construction and 
operation on heritage resources will be not significant. 

6.2.13 Traditional Land and Resource Use 

The potential residual effect associated with the construction and operation of the pipeline on traditional 
land and resource use identified is disruption of farming activities on the Swan Lake Indian Reserve No. 7 
may occur during construction (see Table 6.2 of this ESA). Scheduling of the pipeline construction to 
outside of peak agricultural activity periods, where feasible will lessen the effects to the local farmer. 
Furthermore, advanced notification of pipeline activity schedule to the local farmer and compensation of 
disrupted activities or crop loss will further minimize these effects. It is anticipated that the construction of 
the pipeline will not affect the sustainability of farming activities on the Swan Lake Indian Reserve No. 7 
nor the livelihood of the local farmer. The residual effect is reversible in the short-term and of low 
magnitude. 

Based on Table 6.6 of this ESA, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of 
a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically 
compensated. Consequently, it is concluded that the residual effect of pipeline construction and operation 
on traditional and land resource use will be not significant. 

6.2.14 Social and Cultural Well-Being 

The potential residual effect associated with the construction and operation of the pipeline on social and 
cultural well-being is primarily a temporary increase in the local community population resulting from 
construction of the pipeline (see Table 6.2 of this ESA). Only those communities with sufficient services 
will be selected for locating temporary field offices and accommodating the anticipated 450-550 person 
workforce during construction (e.g., Hardisty, Kerrobert, Kindersley, Rosetown, Moose Jaw, Regina, 
Kipling, Brandon, Virden, Morden, Winkler, Altona). As part of the Alberta Clipper Project orientation, 
construction workers, inspectors and support personnel will receive a presentation on the expectations 
regarding code of conduct for Alberta Clipper Project workers when using community facilities and 
services. 

The linear progression of pipeline construction results in activities occurring for a relatively short period in 
any given location along the route. Therefore, no impacts on social and cultural well-being are anticipated 
as a result of the pipeline since construction activities occur too briefly to influence the well-being of 
communities along the pipeline route. 

Consequently, the residual effect of the construction of the pipeline on social and cultural well-being is 
anticipated to be neutral, and therefore, does not require an evaluation of significance. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-28 
 
 

6.2.15 Human Health 

The potential residual effects on human health (see Table 6.2 of this ESA) associated with construction 
and operation of the pipeline include: 

• short-term increase in nuisance air emissions (e.g., dust, vehicle exhaust, smoke) during 
construction; and 

• short-term increase in nuisance noise during construction. 

The evaluation of significance for nuisance air emissions is discussed in Section 6.2.4 of this ESA under 
GHG and Air Quality while construction noise is evaluated in Section 6.2.5 of this ESA under Acoustic 
Environment. 

6.2.16 Infrastructure and Services 

The potential residual effects on infrastructure and services (see Table 6.2 of this ESA) associated with 
construction and operation of the pipeline includes: 

• increased traffic on highways and local roads used to access the proposed pipeline right-of-way will 
occur during construction; 

• temporary increase in waste flow to regional landfill sites will occur; 

• some local or regional tourist accommodations will be temporarily occupied by Alberta Clipper Project 
workers, including those on the pipeline; and 

• despite best intentions and work practices, incidents arising during construction may warrant the use 
of some emergency services. 

Increased Traffic on Highways and Local Roads 
Alteration of traffic patterns, movements and volumes during construction along major highways and local 
roads is an unavoidable residual effect. Through the implementation of such mitigative measures as using 
multi-passenger vehicles and obeying traffic, road-use and safety laws, the residual effect of construction 
activities on traffic movements is considered to be of low magnitude. 

Temporary Increase in Waste Flow 
Enbridge will reduce waste quantities to the lowest levels practical through Project design and the 
implementation of their Waste Management Plan during construction. All waste generated from the 
Project during construction will be hauled to the appropriate landfill sites in the region depending on the 
type of waste. Receptacles for recycling various products (e.g., paper, cardboard, glass, tin, etc.) will be 
available at the construction offices and will be hauled to appropriate recycling depots. This residual effect 
is of immediate to short-term reversibility and of low to medium magnitude. 

Use of Regional Tourist Accommodations 
Enbridge or its contractor(s) are planning to install a temporary construction camp near Hardisty due to 
limited available accommodation in the regional area. This construction camp will be used to house 
pipeline construction personnel and may also house other Project personnel (e.g., tank or pump station 
construction personnel). The use of a construction camp by Project personnel will alleviate the strain on 
local and regional accommodation in the Hardisty area, thereby minimizing the displacement of tourists, 
especially during the peak tourist season. Some regulatory inspectors and company personnel will 
require lodgings in Hardisty or the regional area (e.g., Killam, Provost) during the construction of the 
Project which might have otherwise been utilized by tourists. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-29 
 
 

Elsewhere along the proposed route, pipeline construction crews, company personnel, regulatory 
inspectors will require lodging communities in the region during the construction of the proposed pipeline 
which might have otherwise been utilized by tourists. Construction activities scheduled during fall and 
winter will occur outside of the peak tourist season. This would allow for the use of regional 
accommodations while minimizing the displacement of tourists. Advanced bookings of lodging for the 
construction workforce during summer construction will ensure that people associated with the pipeline 
construction for the Alberta Clipper Project are accommodated and will allow tourists to pursue other 
available regional accommodations. 

Consequently, this residual effect is of immediate to short-term reversibility. The magnitude of the residual 
effect ranges from low where construction camps are used and where construction occurs during the off-
season to medium where construction occurs during peak tourist season. Off-season use of regional 
accommodation and services is likely to be considered a positive benefit. 

Usage of Emergency Services 
Enbridge is committed to constructing the proposed pipeline, in a safe and responsible manner. There are 
several contingency plans, management plans, and systems either in place or that will be in place to 
prevent accidents and minimize risk of injury to workers during construction. The plans include the 
Emergency Response, Spill Contingency and Fire Contingency plans. All workers and visitors to the job 
site will have to participate in a safety orientation, and upon successful completion, display the valid 
safety sticker on their hardhat before permission to access the job site is granted. Safety issues will be 
discussed onsite daily during tailgate meetings. 

Despite these measures and best intentions, incidents during the construction of the pipeline may arise in 
which emergency services are warranted (e.g., ambulance, fire, police, hospital). Twenty-one 
communities in the local and regional area have sufficient services to respond to the emergency 
situations that may arise during construction of the pipeline (i.e., Hardisty, Provost, Kerrobert, Kindersley, 
Rosetown, Outlook, Davidson, Craik, Moose Jaw, Lumsden, Regina, Montmartre, Kipling, Virden, 
Brandon, Souris, Somerset, Morden, Winkler, Altona, Gretna). Given the proximity of the pipeline to these 
communities and to local grid roads and highways, it is conservatively estimated that response to an 
emergency would likely take no longer than one hour from any point along the proposed route. The 
residual effect of potentially using emergency services during the short-term construction period is of low 
magnitude and low probability. 

Summary 
Based on Table 6.6 of this ESA, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of 
a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically 
compensated. Consequently, it is concluded that the residual effects of pipeline construction and 
operation on infrastructure and services will be not significant. 

6.2.17 Employment and Economy 

The potential residual effects (see Table 6.2 of this ESA) associated with the construction and operation 
of the Alberta Clipper Project, including pipeline and associated pipeline facilities, pump additions and 
Hardisty Terminal tank installation on employment and economy include: 

• local businesses and residents will benefit from the Project through employment opportunities; and 

• the Project will generate revenue for municipal, provincial and federal governments. 

An economic effects analysis of the Alberta Clipper Project was undertaken by Decision Economic 
Consulting Group. The costs associated with the Project were categorized on a provincial basis and 
submitted to Statistics Canada where a custom run of the "Open Interprovincial Input-Output Model" was 
undertaken. The methodology and related assumptions used in the economic effects analysis are 
described in Appendix III of this ESA. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-30 
 
 

Estimates were prepared for the following economic metrics: 

• Output - measures the total value of the goods and services produced within the economy to meet 
the demands of the project. 

• Gross Domestic Product (GDP) - measure of the value of goods and services produced in the 
economy; as compared to output, it measures only the value added in the economy. 

• Employment - measured in full-time person-years of employment. 

• Labour Income - comprises total earnings of employees: wages and salaries plus contributions to 
pension funds, unemployment insurance funds and workman compensation funds. 

• Federal taxes - include corporate and personal income taxes, Goods and Services Tax (GST) plus 
other indirect taxes (such as excise and fuel taxes). 

• Provincial taxes - include corporate and personal income taxes, provincial sales tax plus other indirect 
taxes (such fuel tax). 

• Municipal property taxes - will become payable upon completion of the Project in late 2009. 

In terms of spatial boundaries, data were assessed at the provincial level in the four provinces (Alberta, 
Saskatchewan, Manitoba and Ontario) where expenditures are expected to be made as well as at the 
federal and municipal levels for tax revenues. 

In terms of temporal boundaries, the duration of these impacts will extend from pre-construction (site 
selection, planning and design) through completion of construction (including site restoration). 

Results 
Construction expenditures for the Alberta Clipper Project expenditures are estimated to total 
$1,522 million (in 2007 Canadian dollars), excluding provincial sales taxes. Of this amount, $1,490 million 
(98%) will be spent in Canada on goods and services with $32 million (2%) spent on direct imports. 

As presented in Table 6.7 (located at the end of Section 6.0 of this ESA), expenditures are estimated at 
$56.5 million in Ontario, $206.4 million in Manitoba, $917.4 million in Saskatchewan and $310 million in 
Alberta. Some of these amounts will flow indirectly to other provinces and other countries for 
manufacturing inputs. 

The Alberta Clipper Project is estimated to result in increased Canadian output valued at $2,171.7 million. 
This amount includes direct effects plus indirect effects, the latter being the ripple effects as firms 
purchase additional inputs from other firms. Of this increased output, $300.1 million is estimated to be 
produced in Ontario, $265.2 million in Manitoba, $854.4 million in Saskatchewan and $752.1 million in 
Alberta. 

The Project is estimated to result in increased Canadian GDP of $812.2 million. This amount includes 
direct effects plus indirect effects, the latter being the ripple effects as firms purchase additional inputs 
from other firms. Of this increased GDP, $136.8 million is estimated to be generated in Ontario, 
$104.0 million in Manitoba, $251.2 million in Saskatchewan and $320.2 million in Alberta. 

Construction of the Project is estimated to result in an increase in Canadian employment of 
11,827 person-years. This amount includes direct effects plus indirect effects, the latter being the ripple 
effects as firms purchase additional inputs from other firms. Of this increased employment, 1,866 person-
years is estimated to be created in Ontario, 1,725 person-years in Manitoba, 4,306 person-years in 
Saskatchewan and 3,931 person-years in Alberta. 

As presented in Table 6.7 of this ESA, the Project is estimated to result in increased labour income of 
$553.2 million. This amount includes direct effects plus indirect effects, the latter being the ripple effects 
as firms purchase additional inputs from other firms. Of this increased labour income, $90.7 million is 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-31 
 
 

estimated to be generated in Ontario, $67.2 million in Manitoba, $187.0 million in Saskatchewan and 
$208.3 million in Alberta. 

With regard to federal tax revenues, the Project is estimated to result in increased federal tax revenues of 
$142.4 million. This amount includes direct effects plus indirect effects, the latter being the ripple effects 
as firms purchase additional inputs from other firms. Of this amount, $48.2 million will be generated by 
corporate income tax, $61.8 million by personal income tax and $32.4 million in indirect taxes. 

The Project is estimated to result in increased provincial tax revenues of $117.8 million. This amount 
includes direct effects plus indirect effects, the latter being the ripple effects as firms purchase additional 
inputs from other firms. Of this increased tax revenue, $13.6 million is estimated to be generated in 
Ontario, $15.7 million in Manitoba, $64.7 million in Saskatchewan and $23.8 million in Alberta. 

Municipal property taxes will become payable upon completion of the Project in late 2009. It is estimated 
that, using 2007 dollars and tax rates, the Alberta Clipper Project will result in increased municipal 
property taxes of $6.3 million annually. Of this increased tax revenue, $1.6 million is estimated to be 
generated in Manitoba, $2.9 million in Saskatchewan and $1.8 million in Alberta. 

Summary 
Construction of the Alberta Clipper Project is estimated to result in expenditures on goods and services in 
Canada of approximately $1,490 million. This expenditure is estimated to lead to increased GDP of 
$812.2 million, labour income of $553.2 million and 11,827 person-years of employment. 

Further, this economic activity is estimated to generate increased tax revenues of $142.4 million for the 
Government of Canada, $13.6 million for the Government of Ontario, $15.7 million for the Government of 
Manitoba, $64.7 million for the Government of Saskatchewan and $23.8 million for the Government of 
Alberta. A further $6.3 million in annual municipal property taxes will also be generated in Manitoba, 
Saskatchewan and Alberta. 

The economic analysis undertaken for the Alberta Clipper Project demonstrates the effects of the Project 
on output, GDP, employment, labour income and tax revenues, all of which are considered to be positive 
residual effects on employment and economy, and, consequently, do not require an evaluation of 
significance. 

6.2.18 Accidents and Malfunctions 

The following potential residual effects could occur as a result of accidental events during construction of 
the pipeline: 

• spot spills, once remediated, will have little adverse residual effect, although other resources could be 
affected or lost as a result of the accident; 

• despite vigilance, fires may adversely affect adjacent vegetation and, in very rare situations, affect 
wildlife and adjacent property; 

• rupture of water, sewage or gas lines could lead to interruption of services, contamination of soil and 
water depending on the location and severity of the rupture, and fires in the case of gas while cable 
damage can lead to interrupted service of the utility to communities and local residences; 

• release of drilling mud on land, once cleaned-up and reclaimed, will have little residual effect; 

• depending on the volume and location of the release, a release of drilling mud into a watercourse 
may affect aquatic ecosystems in the short to medium-term; and 

• a pipeline failure may adversely affect adjacent soils, vegetation, wildlife habitat and aquatic 
ecosystems, including aquifers. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-32 
 
 

While substantial adverse effects could occur as a result of an accident during the construction of the 
pipeline, Enbridge will implement the best available technology and safety measures to minimize the 
probability of accidents occurring. Therefore, the potential is low for an accident to occur during 
construction that would have substantial adverse effects. 

Spills of Hazardous Materials During Construction 
Terrestrial spills during construction will generally be very small and localized within the Footprint. Since 
light hydrocarbons (i.e., diesel and hydraulic oils) tend to disperse readily and break down, the potential 
adverse residual effects are reversible in the short-term. 

A spill on an ice-covered waterbody will generally be localized and readily remediated through scraping of 
the contaminated ice surface. However, spills which occur under the ice are more difficult to contain and 
clean-up given the presence of the ice cover. The adverse residual effects associated with a large spill 
under the ice of a waterbody could be considered significant. However, the probability of a significant 
adverse residual effect is low. 

In the event of a large spill such as a fuel truck rollover in a stream, the adverse residual effects could be 
of high magnitude with long lasting ramifications to the health of the stream. Although spill contingency 
and clean-up measures would reduce the magnitude and reversibility of the residual effects, such an 
incident could be considered significant due to the adverse residual effects in a highly sensitive 
environment. Since events such as this rarely occur within the construction right-of-way and even more 
rarely occur instream, the probability of a significant adverse residual effect is low.  

Fire During Construction 
The significance of a fire will depend greatly on the size and what it consumes. Since small fires within 
the Footprint and off of the Footprint are of minor and moderate concern respectively, and can be 
extinguished quickly, they are not likely to cause a significant adverse residual effect. Large fires that 
spread off the Footprint and result in loss of resources and property are likely to be considered a 
significant adverse residual effect. The likelihood of large fires developing is extremely low since the 
construction crews will have firefighting equipment and training, and most of the pipeline route lies in 
close proximity to fire fighting services.  

Rupture of or Damage to Foreign Lines, Enbridge Pipelines and Cables During Construction  
Rupture of a water line, buried cable or telephone line along the route may be inconvenient but the 
adverse residual effects would likely be of low magnitude, and reversible in the immediate to short-term 
since repair would be relatively easy. Rupture of a sewer line would firstly, be an inconvenience and 
secondly, could contaminate the soils and trench in the vicinity of the rupture. Contamination of the soils 
and trench could be remedied relatively quickly with minimal to no residual effect. 

In the event of a rupture of a high-pressure gas line, the risk of explosion and risk to human health could 
be considered significant. Since high pressure pipelines are easily located (as opposed to some low-
pressure plastic distribution lines) and are of sufficient size and strength that rupture is extremely unlikely, 
the probability of a significant adverse effect resulting from an explosion of existing gas pipelines is low. 

The rupture of an existing Enbridge or foreign pipeline during construction of the pipeline resulting in 
severe contamination to lands or water could be considered a significant adverse effect. Since Enbridge 
will be adhering to industry standards, regulatory regulations and company protocols, the probability of a 
significant adverse effect resulting from working in the vicinity of the existing Enbridge pipelines and 
foreign pipelines is low. 

Release of Drilling Mud during Horizontal Directional Drilling 
The release of drilling mud during HDD of a watercourse is not uncommon and, in most cases, is 
relatively benign since the mud is inert and can often be cleaned-up and the areas reclaimed. The 
introduction of a clay based drilling mud into the environment will have variable effects depending on the 
location, volume released and the level of clean-up that is appropriate. Monitoring programs throughout a 
HDD program allow a release of drilling mud to be detected soon after a release occurs. The ability to 
stop the flow of mud quickly also aids in limiting the total volume of drilling mud. Since the total volumes 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-33 
 
 

of drilling mud released during an inadvertent release are generally limited, drilling mud released into a 
watercourse will be dissipated into a watercourse in a short period. Schmidt et al. (2001) evaluated the 
effect of a release of mud during HDD on wetlands at five sites and determined that none displayed 
significant long-term impacts as a result of bentonite discharge and further noted that the level of 
observed impact was in part related to the nature of clean-up procedures. The reversibility of the adverse 
residual effect on the riparian area will depend on the length of time it takes for vegetation to recolonize 
the area disturbed by the mud and clean-up activities but is likely to be short to medium-term.  

Pipeline Failure During Operations 
Pipelines are the safest and most efficient method of transporting large volumes of crude oil and other 
liquid petroleum products over long distances. The significance of a failure of the pipeline system will 
depend greatly on the type of product spilled, volume of product spilled and sensitivity of location of the 
failure. For example, if the incident was contained within a bermed pump station, the residual effect of the 
release would likely be considered not significant whereas, if the released product affected important 
wildlife habitat during critical life stages, sensitive aquatic ecosystems (including aquifers) or downstream 
municipal water intakes, the residual effect would likely be considered significant.  

Enbridge has operated their existing pipelines with diligence over the past 50 years. Enbridge is 
committed to maintaining the pipeline right-of-way and operating the pipeline and associated facilities with 
a continuing high standard of excellence. Through such programs as pipeline integrity management and 
emergency response, the risk of a spill resulting in a significant adverse effect is low. 

Summary 
Based on Table 6.6 of this ESA, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of 
a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically 
compensated. Consequently, it is concluded that the residual effects arising from an accident or 
malfunction during construction and operation for the pipeline will be not significant. 

6.2.19 Pipeline Facilities 

Since the associated pipeline facilities (i.e., block valves and scraper traps) will be located within the 
pipeline construction right-of-way or within existing pump stations/terminals, many of the mitigative 
measures described previously for the pipeline will apply to the pipeline facilities. Rather than restating 
the effects and mitigation associated with each element, see Table 6.2 of this ESA for the applicable 
mitigative measures for the element in question. The following provides an assessment summary for the 
associated pipeline facilities. 

The potential residual effects associated with the construction and operation of the pipeline facilities 
include: 

• minor topsoil / subsoil mixing may occur (see Section 6.2.2 Soil Capability of this ESA); 

• incremental loss or alteration of native vegetation or vegetation important to wildlife will occur (see 
Section 6.2.8 Vegetation of this ESA); 

• weed introduction and/or spreading from disturbance may occur (see Section 6.2.8 Vegetation of this 
ESA); 

• incremental loss or alteration of potential wildlife habitat will occur (see Section 6.2.9 Wildlife and 
Wildlife Habitat of this ESA); 

• although the likelihood of such an event is low, an oil release may affect other resources (see 
Section 6.2.18 Accidents and Malfunctions of this ESA); and 

• despite vigilance, fires may adversely affect adjacent vegetation and, in very rare situations, affect 
wildlife and adjacent property (see Section 6.2.18 Accidents and Malfunctions of this ESA). 

The evaluation of significance of the above potential residual effects is as described in the applicable 
subsection of Section 6.2 of this ESA for the construction and operation of the pipeline. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-34 
 
 

6.3 Effects Assessment - Pump Additions 

Using the assessment methodology described in Section 6.1 of this ESA, the following subsection 
evaluates the potential environmental and socio-economic effects associated with pump additions at the 
following eight existing pump stations/terminals: 

Hardisty Craik Glenboro 
Kerrobert Glenavon Gretna 
Milden Cromer  

Construction activities at the above pump stations/terminals will be undertaken as part of the Alberta 
Clipper Project. The work, consisting of the addition of aboveground pump and new electrical services 
building, will required minimal ground disturbance and will, with one exception, be confined to the existing 
pump station/terminal boundary. A new pump station, the Rowatt Pump Station, is required in support of 
the Alberta Clipper Project. The Rowatt Pump Station will require new lands and ground disturbance.  

The need for additional electrical facilities at the pump stations/terminals, including Rowatt Pump Station, 
is presently being assessed. The assessment of power lines to the pump stations/terminals will be 
deferred to the applicable provincial electrical companies (i.e., AltaLink, ATCO, SaskPower and Manitoba 
Hydro) who, if warranted, will be applying to the provincial regulators for electrical facilities necessary to 
connect with provincial transmission lines. 

Biophysical and socio-economic elements potentially interacting with pump additions include: 

• physical elements such as physical environment, soil capability, water quality and quantity, GHG and 
air quality, and acoustic environment; 

• biological elements such as wetlands, vegetation, wildlife and wildlife habitat, and species at risk; and 

• socio-economic elements such as human occupancy and resource use, and infrastructure and 
services; and  

• accidents and malfunctions. 

Biophysical and socio-economic elements which are not considered to interact with the pump additions 
and the construction of the Rowatt Pump Station are listed and justified in Table 6.8 located at the end of 
Section 6.0 of this ESA.  

The potential environmental and socio-economic impacts associated with pump additions and the 
construction of the Rowatt Pump Station as well as the accompanying proposed mitigative measures and 
resulting residual effects are presented in Table 6.9 located at the end of Section 6.0 of this ESA and are 
presented below. These include: 

• minor topsoil / subsoil mixing may occur at the Rowatt Pump Station (see Section 6.2.2 Soil 
Capability of this ESA); 

• indirect GHG emissions will increase during operation of new pumps;  

• increase in vehicle emissions will occur during pump additions and the construction of the Rowatt 
Pump Station (see Section 6.2.4 GHG and Air Quality of this ESA); 

• increase in noise will occur during pump additions and the construction of the Rowatt Pump Station 
(see Section 6.2.5 Acoustic Environment of this ESA); 

• ambient noise levels at existing stations/terminals and at the Rowatt Pump Station may increase 
during operations; 

• weed introduction and/or spreading from disturbance may occur at the Rowatt Pump Station (see 
Section 6.2.8 Vegetation of this ESA); 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-35 
 
 

• displacement of wildlife away from station/terminal during pump additions or station construction with 
resultant use of potentially suboptimal habitat during noncritical conditions (see Section 6.2.9 Wildlife 
and Wildlife Habitat of this ESA); 

• increase in noise levels in the immediate vicinity of the station/terminal will likely displace wildlife over 
the short to long-term; 

• potential for vehicle/wildlife collisions on access routes and at the station/terminal (see Section 6.2.9 
Wildlife and Wildlife Habitat of this ESA);  

• the installation of aboveground facilities (i.e., pump installation) will form part of the visual landscape 
at the pump station/terminal over the long-term;  

• the installation of aboveground facilities (i.e., buildings, fences, piping) will form part of the visual 
landscape at the Rowatt Pump Station over the long-term; 

• local farmer may experience disturbances of their activities during construction of the Rowatt Pump 
Station (see Section 6.2.11 Human Occupancy and Resource Use of this ESA);  

• increased traffic on highways and local roads used to access the pump stations/terminals will occur 
during the proposed pump additions (see Section 6.2.16 Infrastructure and Services of this ESA);  

• temporary increase in waste flow to regional landfill sites will occur (see Section 6.2.16 Infrastructure 
and Services of this ESA);  

• some local or regional tourist accommodations near Hardisty will be temporarily occupied by 
regulatory inspectors and company personnel (see Section 6.2.16 Infrastructure and Services of this 
ESA); 

• spot spills, once remediated, will have little adverse residual effect, although other resources could be 
affected or lost as a result of the accident (see Section 6.2.18 Accidents and Malfunctions of this 
ESA); and 

• despite vigilance, fires may adversely affect adjacent vegetation, and in very rare situations, affect 
wildlife and adjacent property (see Section 6.2.18 Accidents and Malfunctions of this ESA). 

The evaluation of significance of most of the above potential residual effects is as described in the 
applicable subsection of Section 6.2 of this ESA for the construction and operation of the pipeline. A 
discussion of the potential residual effects pertaining to indirect GHG emissions during operations, noise 
during operations and aesthetics at the pump stations/terminals is provided below. The significance of the 
adverse residual effects associated with pump additions is summarized in Table 6.10 located at the end 
of Section 6.0 of this ESA. 

Greenhouse Gas Emissions During Operations 
The pump additions associated with the Alberta Clipper Project is anticipated to increase indirect GHG 
emissions by 390 kilotonnes (kt) per year during operation of the pumps (see Appendix I of this ESA). 
This represents approximately 0.052% of Canada's total GHG in 2004 (Clearstone Engineering Ltd. 
2007). Of the 390 kt, over 99% of the net increase in indirect GHG emissions is attributed to pump 
operation in Saskatchewan and Alberta where pump stations are dependent on coal-generated electricity. 
Conversely, less than 1% of the estimated increase in indirect GHG emissions will occur in Manitoba 
where the source of the electricity to the pumps originates from hydroelectric power. The residual effect of 
pump operation on indirect GHG emissions is considered to be of low magnitude. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-36 
 
 

Noise During Operations 
Ambient noise levels at each pump station/terminal may increase during the operation of the facility. The 
Rowatt Pump Station, along with existing stations/terminals if the stations/terminals were not subject to 
noise surveys as part of the Enbridge Southern Access Project, will be subject to noise testing prior to 
being placed in service. Enbridge is proposing to conduct to noise surveys at all stations/terminals where 
new pumps occurred for the Alberta Clipper Project (see Section 9.0 of this ESA). These surveys will be 
conducted when the stations/terminals are in-service in order to confirm compliance with Alberta EUB 
Noise Directive 038 (Alberta EUB 2007). Therefore, noise associated with the pump additions component 
of the Alberta Clipper Project is expected to be within acceptable limits at each pump station/terminal and 
the residual effect of this component of the Alberta Clipper Project on the acoustic environment will be of 
low magnitude. 

Noise arising during the operation of the new pumps will likely displace wildlife in the vicinity of the pump 
station/terminal over the short to long-term depending on the species. Given the agricultural setting of 
these pump stations/terminal, the magnitude of this residual effect is low. 

Aesthetics 
The installation of aboveground facilities (i.e., pump installation) will form part of the visual landscape at 
each existing pump station/terminal over the long-term. However, the aboveground components will be 
generally located within existing industrial sites which presently consist of buildings, piping, fences and, 
for some sites, tanks. The addition of the components associated with the pump additions will not 
substantially alter the local viewscape at any of the existing pump stations/terminals. 

Given that the location of the Rowatt Pump Station is largely obscured from the viewscape of the local 
residence and that the station cannot be viewed from an existing highway, the addition of facilities will not 
substantially alter the local viewscape. 

Consequently, the magnitude of this residual effect is negligible to low, depending on the station/terminal.  

Summary 
Based on Table 6.10 of this ESA, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of 
a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically 
compensated. Consequently, it is concluded that the residual effects arising from the proposed pump 
additions will be not significant. 

6.4 Effects Assessment - Hardisty Terminal Tank Installation 

Using the assessment methodology described in Section 6.1 of this ESA, the following subsection 
evaluates the potential environmental and socio-economic effects associated with the installation of six 
tanks and associated facilities (e.g., booster pumps, meter station, mainline pumps, firewater area) at the 
Hardisty Terminal.  

Two other activities form part of the tank installation component, namely the installation of power lines 
and the relocation of the Penn West pipeline. The assessment of power lines to the pump 
stations/terminals will be deferred to the applicable provincial electrical company (i.e., AltaLink, ATCO) 
who, if warranted, will be applying to the provincial regulators for electrical facilities necessary to connect 
with provincial transmission lines. In addition, the assessment of the relocation of the Penn West pipeline 
will be undertaken once details of the location and timing of the relocation are available. 

Biophysical and socio-economic elements potentially interacting with the Hardisty Terminal tank 
installation include: 

• physical elements such as physical environment, soil capability, water quality and quantity, GHG and 
air quality, and acoustic environment; 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-37 
 
 

• biological elements such as vegetation, wildlife and wildlife habitat, and species at risk; and 

• socio-economic elements such as human occupancy and resource use, heritage resources, and 
infrastructure and services; and  

• accidents and malfunctions. 

Biophysical and socio-economic elements which are not considered to interact with the tank installation at 
Hardisty Terminal are listed and justified in Table 6.11 located at the end of Section 6.0 of this ESA.  

The potential environmental and socio-economic impacts associated with the Hardisty Terminal tank 
installation as well as the accompanying proposed mitigative measures and resulting residual effects are 
presented in Table 6.12 located at the end of Section 6.0 of this ESA. These include: 

• minor topsoil / subsoil mixing may occur at the Hardisty Terminal due to tank installation (see 
Section 6.2.2 Soil Capability of this ESA); 

• indirect GHG emissions will increase during operation of new pumps (see Section 6.3 Pump 
Additions of this ESA);  

• increase in vehicle emissions will occur during tank installation at the Hardisty Terminal (see 
Section 6.2.4 GHG and Air Quality of this ESA); 

• odours may be emitted from new tanks;  

• increase in noise will occur during tank installation at the Hardisty Terminal (see Section 6.2.5 
Acoustic Environment of this ESA); 

• ambient noise levels at the Hardisty Terminal may increase during operations (see Section 6.3 Pump 
Additions of this ESA); 

• loss of approximately 17 ha of vegetation important to wildlife, including approximately 10 ha of native 
vegetation;  

• weed introduction and/or spreading from disturbance may occur at the Hardisty Terminal (see 
Section 6.2.8 Vegetation of this ESA); 

• loss of approximately 17 ha of wildlife habitat; 

• displacement of wildlife away from the Hardisty Terminal during tank installation with resultant use of 
potentially suboptimal habitat during noncritical conditions (see Section 6.2.9 Wildlife and Wildlife 
Habitat of this ESA); 

• increase in noise levels in the immediate vicinity of the Hardisty Terminal will likely displace wildlife 
over the short to long-term (see Section 6.3 Pump Additions of this ESA); 

• potential for vehicle/wildlife collisions on access routes and at the Hardisty Terminal (see 
Section 6.2.9 Wildlife and Wildlife Habitat of this ESA);  

• loss of potential habitat supporting wildlife species at risk and displacement of wildlife species at risk 
away from the Hardisty Terminal during tank installation (see Section 6.2.10 Species at Risk of this 
ESA); 

• the installation of aboveground facilities (i.e., buildings, fences, piping, tanks) will form part of the 
visual landscape at the Hardisty Terminal over the long-term; 

• identified surface sites and previously unidentified burial sites may be disturbed during construction 
(see Section 6.2.12 Heritage Resources of this ESA); 

• increased traffic on highways and local roads used to access the Hardisty Terminal will occur during 
tank construction (see Section 6.2.16 Infrastructure and Services of this ESA);  



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-38 
 
 

• temporary increase in waste flow to regional landfill sites will occur (see Section 6.2.16 Infrastructure 
and Services of this ESA);  

• some local or regional tourist accommodations near Hardisty will be temporarily occupied by 
regulatory inspectors and company personnel (see Section 6.2.16 Infrastructure and Services of this 
ESA); 

• spot spills, once remediated, will have little adverse residual effect, although other resources could be 
affected or lost as a result of the accident (see Section 6.2.18 Accidents and Malfunctions of this 
ESA); 

• although the likelihood of such an event is low, a large-scale oil release may affect other resources 
(see Accidents and Malfunctions 6.2.18); and 

• despite vigilance, fires may adversely affect adjacent vegetation, and in very rare situations, affect 
wildlife and adjacent property (see Section 6.2.18 Accidents and Malfunctions of this ESA). 

The evaluation of significance of most of the above potential residual effects is as described in the 
applicable subsection of Section 6.2 of this ESA for the construction and operation of the pipeline or in 
Section 6.3 of this ESA for the pump additions. A discussion of the potential residual effects pertaining to 
odours during operations, loss of wildlife habitat and aesthetics is provided below. The significance of the 
adverse residual effects associated with the tank installation at the Hardisty Terminal is summarized in 
Table 6.13 located at the end of Section 6.0 of this ESA. 

Odours During Operations 
Atmospheric emissions in the form of evaporative losses from storage tanks include vapours of various 
hydrocarbons and sulphur compounds. Air Quality Modelling of H2S, benzene and mercaptan emissions 
will be undertaken by air quality experts from Jacques Whitford/AXYS Environmental Consulting Ltd. for 
the Hardisty Terminal expansion component of the Alberta Clipper Project in Q2 2007 (see Section 9.0 of 
this ESA).   

Under normal operations, minimal off-site air emissions are expected to result from the proposed addition 
of tanks at the Hardisty Terminal since these tanks will feature external floating roofs to manage 
evaporation losses. Events causing potential odourous emissions are anticipated to occur intermittently 
and sporadically throughout the life of the tanks. Odourous events are expected to occur during peak tank 
operation and are expected to be reversible in the immediate to short-term.   

Extrapolating from the results of previous air modelling at the Enbridge Hardisty Terminal for the 
provincially regulated Enbridge Midstream Inc. Hardisty Merchant Tank Project (Jacques Whitford Limited 
2006), and the TransCanada Keystone Pipeline GP Ltd. Project (Jacques Whitford/AXYS Environmental 
Consulting Ltd. 2006) it is anticipated that after the proposed tank expansion, impacts associated with this 
Project will only slightly increase. Also, the ground-level concentrations associated with expected 
increases in emissions are anticipated to be less than the corresponding national and provincial ambient 
objectives and criteria for the substances of interest. 

Consequently, the magnitude of this residual effect on air quality is considered to be low. 

Loss of Wildlife Habitat 
The proposed tanks will be installed on Enbridge-owned property at the Hardisty Terminal. Approximately 
17 ha of wildlife habitat (i.e., native prairie, bush and hay) will be removed as a result of the installation of 
the tanks. No locally or regionally adopted threshold or standard exists against which the incremental 
change in vegetation composition can be judged. Although the area is considered suitable wildlife habitat 
for various species, including species at risk, the habitat features within the proposed tank development 
site also occur through much of the surrounding area and are not considered locally unique (Appendix IV 
of this ESA). Disturbed areas outside of the fenced tank boundary will be seeded with a native seed mix. 
This residual effect is limited to the Footprint, reversible in the long-term and of low magnitude. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-39 
 
 

Aesthetics 
The installation of tanks at the Hardisty Terminal will form part of the visual landscape over the long-term. 
However, the aboveground components will be located within Enbridge's terminal property presently 
consisting of buildings, piping, fences and tanks. With the provision of a vegetative screen on the west 
side of the tank expansion, the addition of the tanks will not substantially alter the local viewscape of the 
nearest residence to the terminal. Consequently, the magnitude of this residual effect is low. 

Summary 
Based on Table 6.13 of this ESA, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of 
a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically 
compensated. Consequently, it is concluded that the residual effects arising from the Hardisty Terminal 
tank installation will be not significant. 

6.5 Effects Assessment - Temporary Facilities for Construction 

The following subsection evaluates the potential environmental and socio-economic effects associated 
with the installation and operation of temporary facilities associated with the construction of the Alberta 
Clipper Project. 

Hardisty Construction Camp 
Enbridge or its contractor(s) are planning to install a temporary construction camp near Hardisty due to 
limited available accommodation in the regional area. This construction camp will be used to house 
pipeline construction personnel and may also house other Project construction personnel (e.g., tank or 
pump station personnel). No other construction camps are planned although Enbridge's contractors may 
elect to use construction camps. 

Siting criteria outlined in Section 4.3 of this ESA will be used in the selection of an appropriate location of 
the camp that will minimize potential environmental and socio-economic effects. Preliminary discussions 
with the Town of Hardisty, County of Flagstaff and MD of Provost representatives have indicated a 
positive response to hosting a temporary construction camp and the desire to work closely with Enbridge 
and its contractor as details of the construction camp (e.g., location, size of camp, number of workers, 
duration of facility operation) become available (O'Connor, Hoyland, Larson, Long pers. comm.). 

All applicable municipal and provincial government approvals for the temporary construction camp will be 
acquired prior to use. Depending on the land use at the facility site, general mitigative measures 
applicable to the construction and operation of the construction camp may include those described in 
Table 6.2 of this ESA pertaining to the following environmental and socio-economic elements: soil 
capability (e.g., topsoil/subsoil mixing); GHG and air quality (e.g., nuisance air emissions); acoustic 
environment (e.g., nuisance noise emissions); wildlife and wildlife habitat (loss or alteration of wildlife 
habitat); social and cultural well-being (e.g., influx of temporary workers); and infrastructure and services 
(e.g., transport of workers, worker accommodation, waste management and emergency services). 
Additional mitigation may be warranted as detailed plans for the construction camp are developed. The 
level of mitigation applied will ensure that any adverse residual environmental effects associated with the 
temporary construction camp at Hardisty are reduced to a level that is not significant. 

Temporary Facilities for Pipeline Construction 
Other temporary facilities which may be required prior to or during pipeline construction of the Alberta 
Clipper Project include: 

• shoo-flies / temporary access roads; 

• equipment storage sites (marshalling yards); 

• pipe stockpile sites; 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-40 
 
 

• bone yards; 

• borrow pits; and  

• construction office sites. 

The need for and the respective general location of these sites are the responsibility of the pipeline 
construction contractor. However, all temporary facility site locations will require the approval of 
Enbridge’s Environmental Inspector or Environment, Health and Safety staff. 

The evaluation of potential temporary facility sites will be conducted as far in advance of its intended use 
as practical in order to allow an adequate time to chose and evaluate any alternate sites. In the event that 
specific mitigation is warranted for the site, the measures developed will be documented in the 
Environmental As-built Report (see Section 8.4.4 of this ESA). General provisions will be included in the 
contract documents that commit contractors to site protection / restoration measures at sites identified, 
evaluated and used during the construction program. Mitigative measures to be used at temporary facility 
sites will be as described in Section 6.2 of this ESA. All applicable landowner as well as municipal, 
provincial and federal government approvals for the temporary facility site will be acquired prior to use of 
the site or area. The level of mitigation applied will ensure that any adverse residual environmental effects 
associated with the temporary facilities for construction are reduced to a level that is not significant. 

6.6 Effects Assessment - Decommissioning and Abandonment 

At some time in the future, certain components associated with the Alberta Clipper Project may be 
removed from service for a short period of time (i.e., less than 12 months). During that time, the 
component would be in stand by or idle mode until the component is placed back into service or 
deactivated. For the latter, an application under Section 44 of the NEB's Onshore Pipeline Regulations 
would be required. A deactivated component may be reactivated and would require an application under 
Section 45 of the NEB's Onshore Pipeline Regulations. The remainder of this subsection describes the 
decommissioning and abandonment phase where decommissioning means the permanent cessation of 
the operation of a pipeline without discontinuance of service and abandonment means the permanent 
cessation of the operation of a pipeline which results in the discontinuance of service. 

At the time of decommissioning and/or abandonment of the Alberta Clipper Project, Enbridge will review 
and consider current options, issues, and regulatory requirements of the day. The decommissioning 
and/or abandonment plan will comply with the acceptable regulatory standards of the day, and will be 
developed in consultation with stakeholders holding an interest in the proposed decommissioning or 
abandonment work. 

Although the NEB has considered amending the Onshore Pipeline Regulations (1999) to provide a 
regulatory process for applications to decommission pipelines (NEB 2003), such a process has yet to be 
implemented. However, contemporary studies by regulators and the pipeline industry do exist that 
examine the technical, environmental and legal issues related to pipeline abandonment (Pipeline 
Abandonment Steering Committee 1996, Pipeline Abandonment Legal Working Group 1997). The 
following briefly outlines how abandonment would be addressed under current practices and procedures. 
The following are three categories under which pipeline abandonment may fall. 

• Abandonment-in-place: the pipeline is purged, cathodic protection of the pipeline is discontinued 
and measures (e.g., insertion of concrete, foam or other materials) are taken to maintain the 
structural integrity of the abandoned pipeline at specific locations such as rail, road and water 
crossings; surface appurtenances are removed and the right-of-way restored to as close to 
predisturbance condition as is practical; 

• Pipeline removal: the entire pipeline, including all surface appurtenances, are removed in their 
entirety and the right-of-way restored to as close to predisturbance condition as is practical; and 

• Combination of abandonment-in-place and pipeline removal: involves use of both options with 
the choice influenced by present and future land use. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-41 
 
 

The abandonment plan will comply with current and acceptable regulatory standards of the day, and will 
be developed in consultation with stakeholders holding an interest in the land disposition. Appropriate 
applications will be filed (e.g., Section 74 of the NEB Act, environmental screening under CEA Act). 
Public safety and environmental protection will be key components of the plan. 

Regardless of which method of abandonment will be used, activities associated with the abandonment of 
the pipeline are anticipated to include dismantling and removing surface facilities, and reclaiming of the 
sites to as close to predisturbance condition as is practical. Consequently, the biophysical and socio-
economic elements interacting with the Alberta Clipper Project would likely include: 

• physical elements such as physical environment (surface erosion), soil capability (admixing of 
topsoil/subsoil), water quality and quantity (sedimentation), air quality (nuisance health effect – dust, 
vehicle emissions), and acoustic environment (nuisance health effect – noise);  

• biological elements such as fish and fish habitat (alteration of habitat, sedimentation), wetlands 
(alteration of habitat function), vegetation (weed introduction), wildlife (auditory disturbance), species 
at risk (auditory disturbance); and 

• socio-economic elements such as human occupancy and resource use (disruption of ranching and 
farming activities), infrastructure and services (transport of workers and supplies); and accidents and 
malfunctions.  

Upon implementation of standard mitigation of the day, it is anticipated that any adverse residual effects 
would be of similar or lesser magnitude to those which are described above for construction of the 
pipeline or facility. 

6.7 Effects of the Environment on the Project 

Enbridge has been operating a pipeline system and associated facilities in the Alberta Clipper Project 
area for over 50 years and is aware of the normal as well as the range of unusual environmental 
conditions experienced along the proposed pipeline route and at the facility sites. This knowledge is 
reflected in the engineering design and mitigative measures proposed to address these environmental 
conditions (see Section 3 of the Alberta Clipper Project Application). In addition, existing environmental 
and socio-economic conditions were taken into consideration when developing the construction schedule 
for the Project.  

As alluded to in Section 6.2 of this ESA, environmental conditions may have other impacts on the Project. 
Where warranted, mitigative measures are identified to eliminate or reduce the severity of these potential 
adverse effects. The following environmental conditions were considered to have the potential to 
adversely affect the Alberta Clipper Project either during construction or operations or both: 

• slumping; 

• flooding; 

• wildfires; 

• changing climatic conditions; and 

• severe weather including high wind speeds, heavy/persistent precipitation or extreme 
temperatures, lightning and temperature inversions. 

6.7.1 Slumping 

Engineering and design of the pipeline has taken into consideration the potential slumping along the 
proposed pipeline route. Areas of potential terrain instability will be monitored during regular aerial patrols 
during operations and remedial action will be promptly undertaken where warranted. Mitigative measures 
will be implemented where the potential for localized terrain instability exists (see Section 6.2.1 of this 
ESA). Post-construction monitoring of the CEP, Terrace Phases I or II route indicated no areas of 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-42 
 
 

slumping after the completion of the project (TERA 1995, 1996, 2000, 2001a, 2002, 2003, 2004). 
Consequently, slumping events are unlikely to affect the integrity of the buried pipeline. Aboveground 
facilities such as valves have been located in areas with low potential for slumping. Therefore, the 
probability of a significant adverse environmental effect on the pipeline resulting from slumping is low (see 
Table 6.6 of this ESA).  

6.7.2 Flooding 

An extreme flood event, either during construction or operations, could result in a loss of cover over the 
pipeline along floodplains and in watercourses along the pipeline route. The potential effects of flooding 
and associated mitigation vary depending upon the timing of the event. A flood event that occurs 
immediately prior to the commencement of instream construction at a water crossing could delay 
construction activities and, in extreme cases, threaten the integrity of the temporary vehicle crossing. The 
duration of use will be considered during the selection of the type of temporary vehicle crossing to be 
installed while the design and sizing (e.g., culvert diameter) and freeboard (e.g., single span structure) of 
the vehicle crossing will meet or exceed the requirements identified in the applicable provincial and 
federal regulations. These structures will be designed and installed to handle the anticipated flow 
conditions during the period of use.  

Should flooding occur during construction of a trenched watercourse crossing, the increased flows could 
exceed the capability of the dams, pumps or flumes used to isolate the construction area or erode 
onshore spoil piles. In the unlikely event that flooding occurs during instream construction, water quality 
would likely be somewhat reduced due to an incremental increase in TSS over the slightly elevated TSS 
levels that are commonly associated with some phases of instream construction. The Flood and 
Excessive Flow Contingency Plan outlined in Appendix 6B of this ESA would be implemented to minimize 
the impacts of high water levels during instream construction. The risk of a flood occurring during 
instream construction is considered to be low for watercourses to be crossed during the late fall or winter 
periods. Along the remainder of the route, the risk of a flood occurring during instream construction is also 
considered low since the weather forecast applicable to the watershed for the anticipated crossing 
construction period is routinely reviewed immediately prior to commencement of crossing construction 
enabling the timely implementation of measures to mitigate any concerns. No flood events occurred 
during the construction of CEP, SEP II, Terrace Phases I or II (IPL 1995, 1998; Enbridge 2000, 2002). 

The pipeline will be buried deep enough to minimize the potential effects of flooding as well as associated 
erosion and scouring. Nevertheless, line patrols during operations will pay particular attention to the bed 
and banks of watercourse crossings following floods to further ensure the integrity of the pipeline and 
minimize impacts on the aquatic environment. Remedial measures will be taken immediately, where 
warranted, following receipt of applicable approvals. No erosion or scouring due to flooding was noted 
during the post-construction monitoring of CEP, SEP II, Terrace Phases I or II (TERA 1995, 1996, 1999, 
2001a, 2002, 2003, 2004). Consequently, the probability of a flood resulting in a significant adverse 
environmental effect is low (see Table 6.6 of this ESA). 

6.7.3 Wildfires 

A wildfire in the immediate vicinity of the pipeline during the construction phase, although unlikely, could 
delay construction activities along bush/wooded areas of the proposed route. Construction activities 
and/or construction-related traffic would be suspended if conditions were considered to be unsafe by 
Enbridge's Chief Inspector or if requested by the appropriate authority (e.g., ASRD, SENV, Manitoba 
Conservation). The short delay of construction activities due to wildfire would generally be considered as 
having a minor affect on the pipeline component. 

During the operations phase, fires are unlikely to adversely affect the buried pipeline. The proposed route 
traverses predominantly cleared, cultivated lands, thereby minimizing the potential for adverse effects as 
a result of a wildfire. Enbridge has in place emergency procedures to shutdown and evacuate the pump 
stations/terminals in the event of immediate fire risk. 

An assessment of the effects arising from construction activities is provided in Sections 6.2, 6.3 and 6.4 of 
this ESA while contingency measures identified in the Fire Contingency Plan (Appendix 6B of this ESA) 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-43 
 
 

have been prepared to ensure that appropriate and effective procedures and materials are in place in the 
event of a fire accidentally caused during construction of the Alberta Clipper Project. As described in 
Section 6.2.18 of this ESA, the probability of a fire resulting in a significant adverse environmental effect 
is low (see Table 6.6 of this ESA). 

6.7.4 Climate Change 

Changes to climatic conditions during operations of the Alberta Clipper Project may manifest in several 
ways. Increases in snow pack in winter and warmer temperatures during spring may extend and intensify 
runoff and alter hydrologic regimes within watercourses including timing and duration of peak flows. 
Changes in summer temperatures and rainfall patterns could lead to an increase in wildfires. During 
operations of the pipeline, Enbridge will be adaptive in their management of the pipeline and schedule 
maintenance activities to suit local environmental conditions (e.g., conducting activity in the riparian area 
during periods of low flow and least risk) so as to minimize the potential environmental impact. By utilizing 
adaptive management practices which are responsive to changing conditions, the effects of climate 
change on the project are anticipated to be neutral and, consequently, do not require an evaluation of 
significance. 

6.7.5 Severe Weather 

High Winds 
High winds could result in the suspension of some construction activities along the pipeline route such as 
topsoil handling, clearing, slash burning and welding. The buried pipeline will not be adversely affected by 
high winds and aboveground facilities such as valves and scraper traps will be designed to withstand 
anticipated wind loads. New pump station buildings and associated structures will be designed and built 
in accordance with provincial and National Building Codes, and, consequently, no adverse effects on 
facility structures are anticipated due to wind, regardless of the wind direction. 

Inclement Weather 
Heavy or persistent precipitation could result in the delay of the construction of the pipeline and tank 
additions if topsoil salvage activities have not been completed or if wet soil conditions create safety or 
trafficability problems. This potential effect pertains to those segments of the proposed route which are to 
be constructed during nonfrozen soil conditions. High water tables will not affect the minimum depth of 
cover.  

During the operations phase, heavy or persistent precipitation or extreme temperatures are not 
anticipated to adversely affect the pipeline (when buried) or aboveground facilities. New buildings will 
house sensitive instruments and equipment as well as provide shelter to Enbridge personnel. Equipment, 
instruments, piping and structures not located within buildings will be constructed of materials suitable for 
low temperature service and will be insulated and/or heat traced. As a result, no adverse effects on the 
Alberta Clipper Project are anticipated to result from inclement weather. 

Lightning 
Since lightning has the potential to affect the power supply and damage equipment, buildings and, where 
warranted, aboveground equipment, will be equipped with lightning arrestors or lightning rods in 
accordance with provincial and National Building Codes to minimize the risk of damage due to lightning. 
Consequently, no adverse environmental effects on the Alberta Clipper Project are anticipated to result 
from lightning. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-44 
 
 

6.8 Summary of Environmental and Socio-Economic Effects Assessment 

6.8.1 Summary of the Assessment of Potential Effects of the Project on the 
Environment 

The environmental and socio-economic effects associated with the construction and operation of the 
Alberta Clipper Project (i.e., pipeline and associated pipeline facilities, pump additions, Hardisty Terminal 
tank installation, temporary facilities for construction) are not unlike those routinely encountered during 
pipeline and associated facility construction in an agricultural setting. 

Numerous potential environmental and socio-economic effects associated with the Alberta Clipper Project 
were identified through: consultation with the federal and provincial government representatives, 
Aboriginal people, other stakeholders and the general public; review of existing literature; field studies; 
and the professional judgement of the assessment team. These potential effects were related to 
biophysical and socio-economic elements including: 

• physical elements such as physical environment, soil capability, water quality and quantity, GHG and 
air quality, and acoustic environment; 

• biological elements such as fish and fish habitat, wetlands, vegetation, wildlife and wildlife habitat, 
and species at risk;  

• socio-economic elements such as human occupancy and resource use, heritage resources, 
traditional land and resource use, social and cultural well-being, human health, infrastructure and 
services, and employment and economy; and 

• accidents and malfunctions. 

Most potential effects arising from the Alberta Clipper Project are associated with the construction of the 
pipeline. Pump additions are generally confined to the existing station/terminal boundary; however, new 
lands will be required for the Rowatt Pump Station and lands supporting native vegetation at the Hardisty 
Terminal will be disturbed. A temporary construction camp at Hardisty is planned. 

Several mitigative strategies have been employed to avoid or minimize the impacts of the Alberta Clipper 
Project including: avoidance through pipeline route selection; scheduling of activities to avoid sensitive 
periods; development of detailed, practical and effective mitigative measures to address numerous site-
specific and general issues; inspection during construction to ensure that planned mitigation is 
implemented and effective; and conducting the maintenance and operation of the pipeline system with a 
high standard of environmental excellence. 

Species at risk or their habitat previously encountered along the proposed pipeline route include northern 
leopard frogs, loggerhead shrike, long-billed curlew and burrowing owl. Given the mitigative measures 
identified above, the residual effect of the construction and operation of the pipeline on species at risk is 
considered to be of low magnitude and not significant. 

Through the implementation of the mitigative strategies, the residual effects associated with the 
construction and operation of the Alberta Clipper Project, including pipeline, pump additions and tank 
components, on the other biophysical and socio-economic elements were considered to be not 
significant. 

6.8.2 Summary of the Assessment of Potential Effects of the Environment on the 
Project 

Environmental conditions such as slumping; flooding; wildfires; changing climatic conditions; and severe 
weather including high wind speeds, heavy/persistent precipitation or extreme temperatures and lightning 
were considered to have the potential to adversely affect the Alberta Clipper Project either during 
construction or operations or both. However, through routing of the pipeline, implementation of 
contingency plans, and burial of the pipe, the potential impacts of the environment on the construction or 
operation of the Alberta Clipper Project will be minimized and are considered to be not significant. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-45 
 
 

6.9 References 

6.9.1 Personal Communications 

Chranowski, D. Regional Wildlife Biologist, Manitoba Conservation. Brandon, Manitoba. 

Duncan, D. Wildlife Biologist. Environment Canada. Edmonton, Alberta. 

Fryer, G. Senior Environmental Planner, Plant Ecologist. TERA Environmental Consultants. Calgary, 
Alberta. 

Gregoire, P. Wildlife Biologist, Canadian Wildlife Service, Environment Canada. Edmonton, Alberta. 

Hoyland, B. Development Officer, Flagstaff County. Sedgewick, Alberta. 

Larson, I. Administrator, MD of Provost No. 52. Provost, Alberta. 

Long, O. Assistant Development Officer, MD of Provost No. 52. Provost, Alberta. 

Moran, T. Regional Wildlife Biologist, Manitoba Conservation. Boissevain, Manitoba. 

O'Connor, K. Finance Clerk, Town of Hardisty. Hardisty, Alberta. 

6.9.2 Literature Cited 

Alberta Energy and Utilities Board. 2007. EUB Noise Directive 038. Website: 
http://www.eub.ca/docs/documents/directives/Directive038.pdf. 

Alberta Environment. 1998. Environmental handbook for pipeline construction. Land Reclamation 
Division, Regulated Operations Branch. 91 pp. 

Alberta Fish and Wildlife Division. 2001. Recommended Land Use Guidelines for Protection of Selected 
Wildlife Species and Habitat Within Grassland and Parkland Natural Regions of Alberta. July 26, 
2001. Draft. 

Alliance Pipeline Limited Partnership. 2000a. Post-Construction Environmental Report for Spread 5S. 
Prepared by TERA Environmental Consultants. 

Alliance Pipeline Limited Partnership. 2000b. Post-Construction Monitoring Report. Prepared by TERA 
Environmental Consultants. 

Alliance Pipeline Limited Partnership. 2000c. Post-Construction Environmental Report for Spread 8SA. 
Prepared by TERA Environmental Consultants. 

Alliance Pipeline Limited Partnership. 2002. Year 2001 Post-Construction Monitoring Report for the 
Alliance Pipeline Project. Prepared by TERA Environmental Consultants. 

Applied Aquatic Research Ltd. 2007. Fish Population and Riverine Habitat Inventories at Watercourse 
Crossings Proposed Enbridge Southern Lights Project. Prepared for: TERA Environmental 
Consultants. Calgary, Alberta. 

Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers, Canadian Energy Pipeline Association and Canadian Gas 
Association. 2005. Pipeline Associated Watercourse Crossings. Prepared by TERA 
Environmental Consultants and Salmo Consulting Inc. Calgary, Alberta. 

Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers. 1996. Hydrostatic test water management guidelines. 
CAPP Publication #19960014. 

Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers. 1999. Environmental operating practices of the upstream 
petroleum industry Alberta operations - Pipelines Volume. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-46 
 
 

Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers. 2005. Planning Horizontal Directional Drilling for Pipeline 
Construction. 62 pp. 

Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment. 1999. Canadian Environmental Quality Guidelines. 
Environment Canada. Hull, PQ. 

Canadian Environmental Assessment Agency. 1994. The Authority's Guide to the Canadian 
Environmental Assessment Act.  

Clearstone Engineering Ltd. 2007. Alberta Clipper Expansion Project Greenhouse Gas Impacts. 

Enbridge Pipelines Inc. 2000. As-built Environmental Report for the Terrace Phase I Expansion Program. 
Spreads A, B and C. 

Enbridge Pipelines Inc. 2002. Post-Construction Environmental Report Terrace Phase II - Pipeline 
Construction. 

Enbridge Pipelines Inc. 2003. Environmental Guidelines for Construction. 

Environment Canada. 2006. Archived HYDAT Hydrometric Data. Water Survey of Canada. Website: 
http://www.wsc.ec.gc.ca/hydat/h20/. Downloaded November 8 and 9, 2006. 

Environmental Management Associates. 1993. Fisheries Impact Evaluation Related to the Proposed IPL 
Western Canadian Facility Pipeline Expansion between Edmonton and Regina. Calgary, Alberta. 

Federal Environmental Assessment and Review Office. 1994. A reference guide for the Canadian 
Environmental Assessment Act: Addressing cumulative environmental effects. Prepared by the 
Federal Environmental Assessment and Review Office. Hull, Quebec. 23 pp. 

Fisheries and Oceans Canada. 1995. Freshwater intake end-of-pipe fish screen guidelines. Prepared by 
Department of Fisheries and Oceans Canada. Ottawa. 

Fisheries and Oceans Canada. 1999. Fish Screening Directive. Last updated July 26, 1999. 

Fisheries and Oceans Canada. 2003. Navigable Waters Protection Program Pipeline Crossing 
Guidelines. Central & Arctic Region. 4 pp.  

Fisheries and Oceans Canada. 2006a. Interim Operational Position Statement, Pipeline Crossings in the 
Prairies Area. Issue Date: January 1, 2006, Expiry Date: March 31, 2007. Website: 
http://www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/regions/central/habitat/os-eo/prov-terr/ab/ab-ops-edo_e.pdf. Accessed 
March 2007. 

Fisheries and Oceans Canada. 2006b. Operational Statements, Central and Arctic Region. Website: 
http://www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/regions/central/habitat/os-eo/prov-terr/index_e.htm. Accessed 
March 2007. 

Fryer, G., G. Dunn and P. Anderson. 2002. Rare plant impact mitigation for the Alliance Pipeline Project. 
Poster presentation at the 7th International Symposium on Environmental Concerns in Rights-of-
Way Management in Calgary, Alberta, September 9-13. 2002. 

Gartman, D.K. 1991. Pipeline construction techniques to minimize wetland impacts. In Wetlands and 
Pipelines: proceedings of the INGAA Foundation First Annual National Environmental 
Symposium. October. Chadds Ford, Pennsylvania, USA. p.1-24. 

Golder Associates Ltd. 1996. Report on Evaluation of the Proposed Pipeline Crossing of Eagle Creek. 
Calgary, Alberta. 

Golder Associates Ltd. 1997. Alliance Pipeline Project: Aquatic Resource and Habitat Assessment for 
Proposed Water Crossings. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-47 
 
 

Grilz, P.L. and J.T. Romo. 1995. Management considerations for controlling smooth brome in fescue 
prairie. Natural Areas Journal 15:148-156. 

Hegmann, G., C. Cocklin, R. Creasey, S. Dupuis, A. Kennedy, L. Kingsley, W. Ross, H. Spaling, and D. 
Stalker. 1999. Cumulative effects assessment practitioners guide. Prepared by AXYS 
Environmental Consulting Ltd. and the CEA Working Group for the Canadian Environmental 
Assessment Agency, Hull, Quebec. 

Interprovincial Pipe Line Inc. 1995. As-Built Environmental Report Capacity Expansion Program. 
Prepared by TERA Environmental Consultants (Alta.) Ltd. 

Interprovincial Pipe Line Inc. 1998. As-Built Environmental Report for the System Expansion Program 
Phase II.  

Jacques Whitford Limited. 2006. Air Quality Assessment for the Proposed Enbridge Hardisty Terminal 
Expansion.  

Jacques Whitford/AXYS Environmental Consulting Ltd. 2006. Environmental and Socio-Economic 
Assessment for the Canadian Portion of Keystone Pipeline Project.  

Leitch, J.A., 1981. The wetlands and drainage controversy - revisited. Minnesota Agricultural Economist 
No. 626. University of Minnesota, St. Paul, 5p. 

Manitoba Natural Resources. 1996. Manitoba Stream Crossing Guidelines for the Protection of Fish and 
Fish Habitat. 56 pp. 

National Energy Board. 2003. Proposed Amendment to the Onshore Pipeline Regulations, 1999 - 
Decommissioning of Pipelines and Related Facilities. File 185-A000-8-1. February 5, 2003. 

National Energy Board. 2004. Filing Manual. Calgary, Alberta. 

Newcombe, C.P. 1994. Suspended sediment in aquatic ecosystems: ill effects as a function of 
concentration and duration of exposure. Victoria, British Columbia. British Columbia Ministry of 
Environment, Lands and Parks. 

Pipeline Abandonment Legal Working Group. 1997. Legal issues relating to pipeline abandonment: a 
discussion paper. May 1997. Calgary, Alberta. 79 pp. 

Pipeline Abandonment Steering Committee. 1996. Environmental and technical issues associated with 
pipeline abandonment - discussion paper. Calgary, Alberta. 

Reid, S.M. and P.G. Anderson. 1999. Effects of sediment released during open-cut pipeline water 
crossings. Canadian Water Resources Journal, 24(3): 23-39. 

Reid, S. and P.G. Anderson. 2000. Evaluation of Isolated Water Crossings during Winter Construction 
along the Alliance Pipeline in Northern Alberta. In Goodrich-Mahoney, John W., D.F. Mutrie, and 
C.A Guild, eds. The Seventh International Symposium on Environmental Concerns in Rights-of-
Way Management, Calgary, Alberta. 735-742. 

RL&L Environmental Services Ltd. 1998. Fisheries assessment for the IPL Terrace Phase I Expansion 
Program. Prepared for: TERA Environmental Consultants (Alta.) Ltd. RL&L Report No. 624F: 164 
pp. + 4 app. 

RL&L Environmental Services Ltd. 2000. Fisheries Assessment of Eyehill Creek for the Enbridge 
Pipelines Inc. Terrace Phase II Expansion Program. Prepared for: TERA Environmental 
Consultants (Alta.) Ltd. 

Santillo, D.J. 1993. Observations on the effects of construction of a natural gas pipeline right-of-way on 
wetland vegetation and birds. Proceedings of the Fifth International Symposium on Environmental 
Concerns in Rights-of-Way Management. September. Montreal, Québec, Canada. (eds) G. J. 
Doucet, C. Séguin and M. Giguère. p.325-329. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-48 
 
 

Saskatchewan Conservation Data Centre. 2003. Saskatchewan Activity Restriction Guidelines for 
sensitive species in natural habitats. September 2003. 

Schmidt, J, C. Tammi, D. Cameron, E. Steel and J. Evans. 2001. Evaluating the effects of muds on 
wetlands from horizontal directional drilling (HDD) within natural gas transmission line rights-of-
way. Proceedings of the 7th International Symposium on Environmental Concerns in Rights of 
Way Management. Calgary, Alberta. Sept. 9-13, 2000. 

Scobie, D. and C. Faminow. 2000. Development of Standardized Guidelines for Petroleum Industry 
Activities that Affect COSEWIC Prairie and Northern Region Vertebrate Species at Risk. 
Prepared for Environment Canada, Prairie and Northern Region, Edmonton, Alberta. 

Shem, L.M., Zimmerman, R.E., Sellmer, S.D., Van Dyke, G.D. and J.R. Rastorfer. 1993. Regeneration of 
vegetation on wetland crossings for gas pipeline rights-of-way one year after construction. 
Proceedings of the Fifth International Symposium on Environmental Concerns in Rights-of-Way 
Management. September. Montreal, Québec, Canada. (eds) G. J. Doucet, C. Séguin and M. 
Giguère. p.183-190. 

TERA Environmental Consultants (Alta.) Ltd. 1995. Capacity Expansion Program 1995 Post-Construction 
Monitoring Report.  

TERA Environmental Consultants (Alta.) Ltd. 1996. Capacity Expansion Program 1996 Post-Construction 
Monitoring Report.  

TERA Environmental Consultants (Alta.) Ltd. 1999. System Expansion Program Phase II 1999 Post-
Construction Monitoring Report.  

TERA Environmental Consultants (Alta.) Ltd. 2000. Terrace Phase I Expansion Program 2000 Post-
Construction Monitoring Report.  

TERA Environmental Consultants (Alta.) Ltd. 2001a. Terrace Phase I Expansion Program 2001 Post-
Construction Monitoring Report.  

TERA Environmental Consultants (Alta.) Ltd. 2001b. Alliance Pipeline Limited Partnership Post-
Construction Monitoring Report.  

TERA Environmental Consultants. 2002. Terrace Phase II Expansion Program 2002 Post-Construction 
Monitoring Report.  

TERA Environmental Consultants. 2003. Terrace Phase II Expansion Program 2003 Post-Construction 
Monitoring Report.  

TERA Environmental Consultants. 2004. Terrace Phase II Expansion Program 2004 Post-Construction 
Monitoring Report.  

TransCanada PipeLines Limited. 1990. 1991 and 1992 Facilities Application. Hearing Order GH-5-89. 
Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment. Saskatchewan Facilities. 

TransCanada PipeLines Limited. 1992. 1993 - 94 Facilities Applications. Environmental and Socio-
Economic Assessment. Saskatchewan Facilities. 

Van dyke, G.D., Shem, L.M., Wilkey, P.L., Zimmerman, R.E. and S.K. Alsum. 1994. Pipeline corridors 
through wetlands: summary of seventeen plant-community studies at ten wetland crossings. 
December. Gas Research Institute. GTI 1770. Chicago, IL. 96p. 

Zimmerman, R.E. and Wilkey, P.L. 1992. Pipeline corridors through wetlands. Proceedings of the 1992 
International Gas Research Conference. November. Orlando, Florida, USA. H.A. Thompson (ed.) 
p. 478-491. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-49 
 
 

TABLE 6.1 
 

EVALUATION OF THE SIGNIFICANCE OF RESIDUAL EFFECTS - 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC ASSESSMENT CRITERIA1 

Assessment Criteria Definition 
SPATIAL CONTEXT - location of effect 
Footprint The land area disturbed by the Project, construction and reclamation activities, including associated physical works 

and activities (i.e., permanent pipeline right-of-way, temporary construction workspace, temporary stockpile sites, 
temporary staging areas, facility sites). 

Local The area which could potentially be affected by construction and reclamation activities beyond the construction right-
of-way including associated physical works and activities. The local boundary varies with the discipline and issue 
being considered (e.g., for assessment of the effects of noise on wildlife, the area affected by noise (i.e., 2 km buffer) 
from the source is included in this boundary). 

Region The area extending beyond the local boundary. The boundary for the region also varies with the discipline and the 
issue being considered (e.g., for socio-economic analysis, regional boundaries include large communities that will be 
used as construction offices or regional municipal district boundaries). 

Province The area extending beyond regional or administrative boundaries, but confined to Manitoba, Saskatchewan or 
Alberta (e.g., provincial permitting boundaries, etc.). 

Transboundary The area extending outside Canada. 
TEMPORAL CONTEXT 

Immediate Event duration is limited to less than or equal to two days. 
Short-term Event duration is longer than two days but less than or equal to one year. 
Medium-term Event duration is longer than one year but less than or equal to ten years. 

Duration (period 
of the event 
causing the 
effect) 

Long-term Event duration extends longer than ten years. 
Accidental Occurs rarely over assessment period. 
Isolated Confined to specified period. 
Occasional Occurs intermittently and sporadically over assessment period. 
Periodic Occurs intermittently but repeatedly over the construction and operations period. 

Frequency (how 
often would the 
event that 
caused the effect 
occur) 

Continuous Occurs continually over the construction and operations period. 
Immediate Residual effect is alleviated in less than or equal to two days. 
Short-term Greater than two days and less than or equal to one year to reverse residual effect. 
Medium-term Greater than one year and less than or equal to ten years to reverse residual effect. 
Long-term Greater than ten years to reverse residual effects. 

Reversibility 
(period of time 
over which the 
residual effect 
extends) 

Permanent Residual effects are irreversible. 
MAGNITUDE 2 - of the residual effect 
Negligible Residual effects are not detectable. 
Low Potential effects are detectable, but well within environmental and/or social standards or tolerance. 
Medium Potential effects are detectable and approaching, but below environmental and/or regulatory standards or tolerance. 
High Potential effects are beyond environmental and/or social standards or tolerance. 
PROBABILITY OF OCCURRENCE - likelihood of residual effect 
High Likely. 
Low Unlikely. 
LEVEL OF CONFIDENCE 3 - degree of certainty related to significance evaluation 
Low Determination of significance based on incomplete understanding of cause-effect relationships and incomplete data 

pertinent to the project area. 
Moderate Determination of significance based on good understanding of cause-effect relationships using data from outside the 

project area or incompletely understood cause-effect relationships using data pertinent to the project area. 
High Determination of significance based on good understanding of cause-effect relationships and data pertinent to the 

project area. 

Notes: 1 Significant Adverse Residual Effect: A high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot be 
technically mitigated or economically compensated.  

 2 In consideration of magnitude, there is no environmental standard, guideline or objective for many of the construction/operation issues under 
evaluation. Therefore, the determination of magnitude of the adverse residual effect often entailed an historical consideration of the assessment 
of magnitude made by regulators, land authorities, lessees, other stakeholders and the assessment team to adverse effects. The assessment 
team was also aware of the increasingly stringent societal norms related to environmental impact. 

 3 Level of confidence was affected by availability of data, precedence, degree of scientific uncertainty or other factors beyond the control of the 
assessment team. 



 

P
age 6-50 

TABLE 6.2 
 

POTENTIAL BIOPHYSICAL AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC EFFECTS, MITIGATIVE MEASURES 
AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF ALBERTA CLIPPER PIPELINE CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
1. PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT 
1.1 Terrain instability arising from 

slumping 
Moderate to steep slopes and 
sidehills 

Footprint • Enbridge has commissioned geotechnical engineering experts to assess the proposed 
crossing of Deadhorse Creek (west side of valley, approximately KP 1196.6 to KP 1197.7). 

• Utilise the following standard mitigation where unstable areas are encountered: slope back 
right-of-way cuts; maintain or re-establish surface and/or subsurface drainage patterns; 
install drainage and erosion controls such as berms, trench breakers and subdrains; armour 
streambanks where warranted. 

• Follow site-specific recommendations of a geotechnical engineer in areas where unstable 
slopes are anticipated. 

• Follow mitigative measures outlined in the Detailed Crossing Construction Plan for the South 
Saskatchewan River Valley to be undertaken by Enbridge prior to construction (see 
Section 9.0 of the ESA). 

• Recontour the right-of-way and restore the preconstruction grades and drainage channels. 
[EGC 03-3] Where restoration of the preconstruction grade is not feasible due to risk of 
failure of fill on slopes, recontour to grades not exceeding 1:3 (rise over run), or as directed 
by Enbridge’s engineer. [EGC 03-3] 

• Monitor the right-of-way on a routine basis for the life of the pipeline. Issues related to slope 
instability will be reported to Enbridge’s Environment, Health and Safety staff. Enbridge will 
employ applicable remedial measures on a timely basis. 

• Areas of minor terrain 
instabilities may occur.  

• Topography maybe altered at 
locations where cut slopes are 
too steep to be replaced. 

1.2 Loss of depth of cover due to 
flooding and erosion 

Watercourses Footprint • Construct watercourse crossings during periods of low flow in order to minimize the risk of 
encountering high flows and flooded low areas during construction, where feasible. 

• Implement the Flooding and Excessive Flow Contingency Plan (Appendix 6B) if excessive 
flows are anticipated within the instream construction window of watercourses that are 
planned to be crossed using a trenched technique or if excessive flow or flood conditions 
should occur during watercourse crossing construction. 

• Proposed pipeline burial depths at watercourses have taken into consideration flood events 
and scouring of the bed in order that risk to the integrity of the pipeline due to such events is 
minimal. 

• Siltation of watercourses as a result of flooding or excessive flows is discussed under Fish 
and Fish Habitat element 6.3 of this table. 

• See Effects of the 
Environment on the Project 
(Section 6.7 of the ESA) for a 
discussion on floods. 

1.3 Wildfire Bush/Wooded Areas Footprint to 
Region 

• Ensure appropriate and effective procedures and materials are in place in the event of a 
wildfire during construction. Implement the Fire Contingency Plan (see Appendix 6B). See 
also Effects of the Environment on the Project in Section 6.7 of the ESA. 

• See Accidents and Malfunctions element 18.2 of this table for discussion regarding potential 
fire caused by Alberta Clipper pipeline construction activities. 

• Note that a wildfire is not expected to affect the operation of the buried pipeline. 

• See Effects of the 
Environment on the Project 
(Section 6.7 of the ESA) for a 
discussion on wildfire. 

1.4 Climate change Entire route Footprint to 
Region 

• Consider the changes to climatic conditions (e.g., snow pack conditions, timing and intensity 
of runoff and discharge within watercourses, amount of rainfall) within the Alberta Clipper 
pipeline area when scheduling maintenance activities along the route. 

• See Effects of the 
Environment on the Project 
(Section 6.7 of the ESA) for a 
discussion on climate change. 

 



 

P
age 6-51 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
1.5 Previous site contamination Isolated Sites (e.g., 1154.8) 

Landfill (KP 365.4; KP 1245.1) 
Sites identified during past 
construction:  
KP 176.4 
KP 407.5 to KP 407.7 
KP 434.0 to KP 434.5 
KP 435.0 to KP 435.05 
KP 443.0 to KP 443.1 
KP 517.7 
KP 534.1 
KP 573.2 to KP 573.25 
KP 993.2 (salt water) 
KP 990.23 (hydrocarbon) 
KP 998 (hydrocarbon) 
KP 1005.5 (hydrocarbon) 
KP 1045.5 (hydrocarbon) 
KP 1061.05 (hydrocarbon) 
KP 1065.5 (hydrocarbon) 
KP 1065.8 (hydrocarbon) 
See also Tables 5.13 and 5.14 of the 
ESA 

Footprint • Notify Enbridge's Environment, Health and Safety staff in the event that contaminated soils 
are encountered during ground disturbance activities. Enbridge's Environment, Health and 
Safety staff will be responsible for determining the appropriate course of action using their 
established guidelines on file with the NEB (i.e., Enbridge Operating & Maintenance 
Procedures (O&MP), Book 3: Contaminated Soil Management, Section 04-02-024). 

• Follow the mitigative measures recommended in the geotechnical assessment report for 
construction at the landfill at KP 365.4 and at the inactive landfill at KP 1245.1.  

• Narrow down temporary workspace and minimize area of disturbance at the landfills.  
• Install trench breakers at the edges of the landfills if coarse-textured substrate or 

groundwater seepage is present to contain any contaminated water that may be encountered 
and prevent movement of the water along the trench (Detail 6A-20). 

• No residual effect identified. 

2. SOIL CAPABILITY 
2.1  Lowering of topsoil capability through topsoil /subsoil mixing    
2.1(a) lowering of topsoil capability 

through topsoil stripping 
Entire route Footprint Topsoil Depth 

• Salvage the total depth of topsoil to a maximum depth of 40 cm, unless otherwise requested 
by landowner, using the Environmental Alignment Sheets as a guide. [EGC 02-5] 

• Where topsoil is less than 40 cm, salvage topsoil to colour change, plow layer or 10 cm, 
whichever is deepest. Increase minimum stripping depth to 15 cm where work side topsoil 
salvage is conducted. [EGC 02-5]  

• For Dune Sand Series, salvage a minimum of 15 cm of material even though the topsoil 
depth may be considerably less. 

• For Hilton, Flat Lake and Grill Lake Series where topsoil or surface organic material is absent 
or intermittent, salvage a minimum of 10 cm. 

• Maintain a minimum of 0.76 m cover over hot lines, reducing the depth of topsoil stripping if 
necessary. Where there is 0.83 m or less of cover over the existing pipeline before stripping, 
suspend stripping. Place a protective covering over the topsoil in the spoil area to prevent 
topsoil and subsoil mixing (e.g., matting, sheeting, straw). [EGC 02-5] 

Topsoil Stripping (General) 
• Accommodate topsoil salvage preferences of the landowner. 
• Salvage topsoil from areas to be graded and windrow to the closest edge of the construction 

right-of-way. Avoid overstripping. The area stripped is to correspond to area to be graded. 
• Retain sod on native prairie lands and on bush, hay and pasture lands if a competent sod 

layer exists. Grade only where safety considerations dictate in order to minimize disturbance 
to sod. No grading of native prairie, bush, hay lands or pasture lands shall be permitted on 
level terrain. 

• Salvage a greater width of topsoil at sharp sidebends and at crossings of watercourses, 
roads, rail lines, drains and foreign lines to accommodate a wider and deeper trench. [EGC 
02-5] 

• Mixing of topsoil and subsoil 
will likely occur. 



 

P
age 6-52 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
2.1(a) lowering of topsoil capability 

through topsoil stripping 
(cont’d) 

Same as above Same as above Topsoil Stripping (General) (cont'd) 
• Strip topsoil from the full right-of-way during nonfrozen soil conditions at all bored crossings 

on cultivated lands (Detail 6A-7 in the Construction and Reclamation Plan (Appendix 6A)). 
• Strip topsoil from an area larger than the bellhole on well-sodded lands during nonfrozen 

conditions to allow feathering-out of spoil over the stripped area (Detail 6A-7). [EGC 02-8] 
• When stripping topsoil over adjacent hot lines, use (a) a grader with basic operating weight 

not exceeding 40,500 lbs and a maximum axle lading of 18,000 lbs per axle, or (b) a 
company approved equivalent. [EGC 02-5] 

• Do not strip topsoil within 6 m of a protective sleeve. [EGC 02-5] 
• Maintain a 1 m (min) separation between the base of a topsoil pile and the base of a subsoil 

pile. [EGC 02-5] 
• Minimize grading on native prairie and where blade width topsoil salvage is to be conducted 

on hay and pasture lands to minimize disturbance to the sod. 
• Grade the right-of-way on sidehill terrain as per Detail 6A-8. 
• During wet/thawed conditions, implement the Wet/Thawed Soil Contingency Plan outlined in 

Appendix 6B. [EGC 02-5, 02-16] 
• Implement the Soil Handling Contingency Plan outlined in Appendix 6B during topsoil 

stripping if any of the following are encountered: uneven boundary between topsoils and 
subsoils; uneven surface on native prairie or pasture; wetlands; or requests for alternate 
topsoil handling methods by a landowner. 

• Follow measures in the Traffic Control Plan (Appendix 6C) to minimize the potential for 
topsoil/subsoil mixing during salvage operations. 

Topsoil Stripping (Nonfrozen) 
• Salvage topsoil from the trench and spoil area (Detail 6A-11) on cultivated lands and poorly 

sodded hay and pasture lands as indicated on the Environmental Alignment Sheets. 
• Salvage a blade width of topsoil centred over the trench (Detail 6A-10) on well sodded hay, 

pasture, bush-pasture and bush lands as well as native prairie as indicated on the 
Environmental Alignment Sheets. Disc well sodded lands prior to blade width stripping in 
order to facilitate topsoil stripping operations. 

• Follow Criteria for Progressively Increased Topsoil Stripping Widths outlined in Appendix 6B 
for determining under which circumstances topsoil stripping widths may be altered on a 
particular land use.  

• Begin clean-up of segments of the route constructed during nonfrozen conditions as soon as 
possible after backfilling and before freeze-up, if possible. [EGC 03-3] 

• Postpone clean-up on wet ground until soils dry out. [EGC 03-3]  
Topsoil Stripping (Frozen) 
• Prestrip topsoil prior to freeze-up if feasible. Attempt to have all topsoil stripping completed 

prior to October 31. 
• Maintain snow cover over the area to be stripped as long as possible. Remove snow just 

before stripping and windrow to the edges of the right-of-way. [EGC 02-5] 
• Remove or pack snow on the work side to increase frost penetration onto the soil. In mid to 

late winter, pack snow on the work side to avoid premature thawing of the upper soils. 
• Windrow snow over the trench line to prevent deep frost penetration along the trench line. 

[EGC 02-7] 

• Same as above 



 

P
age 6-53 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
2.1(a) lowering of topsoil capability 

through topsoil stripping 
(cont’d) 

Same as above Same as above Topsoil Stripping (Frozen) (cont’d) 
• Grade snow over the travel lane to improve driving conditions and either grade the spoil pile 

area or grade snow over the spoil pile area on cultivated lands to smooth furrows and 
facilitate removal of spoil during backfilling. 

• Leave 3 m wide gaps every 400 m in the snow windrow greater than 0.75 m in height on 
pasture lands and areas of native vegetation to allow wildlife and livestock movement. [EGC 
02-7] 

• Limit removal of snow from the spoil side area. Excess snow that could interfere with 
backfilling operations is to be removed while an 8-10 cm buffer layer of snow is to be left in 
place to avoid topsoil/subsoil mixing during backfilling. [EGC 02-7] 

• Frozen soil conditions are in effect when frost has reached the depth of the interface 
between topsoil and subsoil. 

• Follow measures outlined in Detail 6A-22 should grade or topsoil replacement be delayed. 
• Salvage a blade width of topsoil centred over the trench (Detail 6A-10) on all land uses as 

indicated on the Environmental Alignment Sheets. Limit topsoil stripping activities during 
frozen conditions to specialized equipment capable of accurately separating topsoil from 
subsoil. 

• Ensure backfilling of lowered-in pipe is completed by nightfall during winter construction. 
[EGC 03-2] 

• Avoid mixing snow with spoil during backfilling. [EGC 03-2] 
• Postpone compaction of frozen trench spoil until final clean-up in mid to late spring. [EGC 

03-2] 
• Begin rough clean-up along segments of the route constructed during frozen conditions as 

soon as possible after backfilling and before spring break-up. [EGC 03-3] 
• Begin final clean-up of segments of the route constructed during frozen conditions as soon 

as possible after break-up (Detail 6A-21). [EGC 03-3]  
Topsoil Replacement 
• Postpone replacing topsoil during wet weather or high winds to prevent damaging soil 

structure or erosion of topsoil. [EGC 03-3]. 
• Replace topsoil evenly over all portions of the right-of-way that were stripped. [EGC 03-3] 
• Avoid scalping of the sod layer on hay and pasture lands when moving the topsoil pile during 

backfilling. [EGC 03-2] 
• Strip a wider area of topsoil, if warranted, in the late spring on cultivated, hay or pasture 

lands where topsoil salvage was conducted during frozen conditions to allow excess trench 
spoil to be feathered-out over the stripped area (Detail 6A-21). [EGC 03-2] 

• Same as above 

2.1(b) lowering of topsoil capability 
through trench instability during 
trenching 

Soil Series: 
Agassiz, Asquith, Biggar, 
Birkenhead, Bradwell, Cathkin, 
Cazlake, Chaplin, Desjarlais, Dolcy, 
Dune Sand, Glenavon, Glenboro, 
Gnadenthal, Haight, Hatton, Hairy 
Hill, Joyale, Metiskow, Neunenberg, 
Oak Lake, Osborne, Ramada, 
Scarth, Scollard, Stockton, Swift 
Creek, Vandal, Wainwright, 
Whitesand, Windthorst, Wingello 

Footprint • Suspend trenching and strip a wider area of topsoil if the trench walls slough into the ditch 
and the potential for topsoil/subsoil mixing exists. Back slope the trench walls until stable. 
Equip hoe with a swamp bucket, or equip trenching wheel with slope cutters, if practical, to 
minimize trench sloughing. [EGC 02-5, 02-8] 

• If possible, salvage topsoil from under the new spoil pile on the spoil side and relocate to the 
edge of the extra working space. [EGC 02-5] 

• For sandy soils and dunes (e.g., Dune Sand Series), strip an extra width of topsoil to allow 
for slumping of trench walls, or where trench walls are sloped. [EGC 02-5]. 

• Weld up pipe prior to trenching at locations with soils prone to sloughing in order to minimize 
the time the trench is left open. Equip trenching wheel with slope cutters, if warranted, to 
minimize the risk of trench sloughing. 

• Minimize the length of open trench and the amount of time between trenching and backfilling 
operations to limit the amount of trench sloughing. 

• Minor amount of 
topsoil/subsoil mixing may 
occur due to trench instability. 



 

P
age 6-54 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
2.1(c) lowering of topsoil capability 

through mixing with saline lower 
subsoil 

scCoronation Series 
(KP 248.9 to KP 250.1) 
scElstow Series 
(KP 280.9 to KP 281.3) 
(KP 300.0 to KP 301.5) 
(KP 310.2 to KP 310.5) 
(KP 312.3 to KP 312.8) 
scGnadenthal Series 
(KP 1224.4 to KP 1225.3) 
scHughenden Series 
(KP 207.8 to KP 208.2) 
scMetiskow Series 
(KP 248.4 to KP 248.9) 
scRegina Series 
(KP 356.0 to KP 358.3) 
(KP 654.4 to KP 655.9) 
scScott Series 
(KP 307.5 to KP 309.2) 
(KP 311.4 to KP 311.7) 
(KP 320.8 to KP 321.6) 
(KP 499.1 to KP 499.6) 
(KP 500.4 to KP 500.8) 
(KP 501.1 to KP 502.8) 
(KP 543.0 to KP 544.3) 
(KP 602.3 to KP 602.9) 
scWeyburn-Scott Series 
(KP 527.2 to KP 527.5) 
(KP 528.9 to KP 529.4) 
(KP 532.7 to KP 533.3) 
(KP 603.2 to KP 604.3) 
scWeyburn Series 
(KP 536.5 to KP 538.0) 
(KP 539.4 to KP 539.9) 
(KP 568.4 to KP 568.9) 
(KP 579.2 to KP 580.0) 
(KP 590.5 to KP 590.7) 
(KP 590.7 to KP 591.0) 
(KP 603.3 to KP 604.5) 
(KP 638.0 to KP 638.5) 
(KP 746.2 to KP 746.7) 
(KP 752.7 to KP 753.2) 

Footprint • Conduct three-lift soil handling on lands with a higher salt content in the lower subsoil than 
the upper subsoil as indicated on the Environmental Alignment Sheets (Details 6A-15 and 
6A-16). 

• Strip upper subsoils from an area twice the width of the trench and to the depth indicated on 
the Environmental Alignment Sheets. 

• Store topsoil on the spoil side of the trench next to the stripped area. [EGC 02-5] 
• Salvage and store the upper subsoil separately from the lower subsoil at locations where 

three-lift soils handling is required and grading is necessary. 
• Store the first lift of trench subsoil on the spoil side, either next to the trench or back far 

enough to store the second lift. Maintain a separation between the topsoil pile and the 
subsoil piles, and also between subsoil piles. [EGC 02-5] 

• Backfill each lift in the correct sequence to ensure that saline lower subsoils do not 
contaminate upper subsoil horizons. 

• Overstrip scWeyburn soils from KP 590.5 to KP 590.7 to a total depth of 20-25 cm as 
indicated on the Environmental Alignment Sheets. 

• Undesirable lower subsoils 
may be unexpectedly 
encountered and admixed with 
upper subsoil horizons. 

• Revegetation of soils saline to 
the surface may be difficult. 

2.1(d) lowering of topsoil capability 
through mixing with gravely 
lower subsoils 

Scollard Series 
(KP 180.3 to KP 180.7) 
Birkenhead Series  
(KP 1190.0 to KP 1190.2) 
(KP 1193.3 to KP 1193.9) 
(KP 1198.2 to KP 1198.6) 

Footprint • Conduct three-lift soil handling on lands with a higher gravel content in the lower subsoil than 
the upper subsoil as indicated on the Environmental Alignment Sheets (Details 6A-15, 
6A-16). 

• Strip upper subsoils from an area twice the width of the trench and to the depth indicated on 
the Environmental Alignment Sheets. Note that the trench may be prone to trench sloughing 
in areas of gravely subsoils. 

• Store topsoil on the spoil side of the trench next to the stripped area. [EGC 02-5] 

• Undesirable lower subsoils 
may be unexpectedly 
encountered and admixed with 
upper subsoil horizons. 



 

P
age 6-55 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
2.1(d) lowering of topsoil capability 

through mixing with gravely 
lower subsoils 

Same as above Same as above • Salvage and store the upper subsoil separately from the lower subsoil at locations where 
three-lift soils handling is required and grading is necessary. 

• Store the first lift of trench subsoil on the spoil side, either next to the trench or back far 
enough to store the second lift. Maintain a separation between the topsoil pile and the 
subsoil piles, and also between subsoil piles. [EGC 02-5] 

• Backfill each lift in the correct sequence to ensure that gravely lower subsoils do not 
contaminate upper subsoil horizons. 

• Same as above 

2.1(e) lowering of topsoil capability 
through mixing of sands with 
clayey lower subsoils 

shallow Stockton Series 
(KP 1083.7 to KP 1084.2) 
(KP 1197.7 to KP 1200.1) 

Footprint • Conduct three-lift soil handling on lands characterized by sands overlying clays at shallow 
depths as indicated on the Environmental Alignment Sheets to maintain upper subsoil 
texture (Details 6A-15, 6A-16). 

• Strip upper subsoils from an area twice the width of the trench and to the depth indicated on 
the Environmental Alignment Sheets.  

• Store topsoil on the spoil side of the trench next to the stripped area. [EGC 02-5] 
• Salvage and store the upper subsoil separately from the lower subsoil at locations where 

three-lift soils handling is required and grading is necessary. 
• Store the first lift of trench subsoil on the spoil side, either next to the trench or back far 

enough to store the second lift. Maintain a separation between the topsoil pile and the 
subsoil piles, and also between subsoil piles. [EGC 02-5] 

• Backfill each lift in the correct sequence to ensure that lower clayey subsoils do not mix with 
sandy upper subsoil horizons. 

• Clayey lower subsoils may be 
unexpectedly encountered and 
admixed with upper sandy 
subsoil horizons. 

2.1(f) lowering of topsoil capability 
through mixing due to shallow 
topsoils 

Flat Lake Series 
(KP 324.6 to KP 325.4) 
(KP 326.3 to KP 327.1) 
(KP 327.3 to KP 327.5) 
(KP 330.0 to KP 330.5) 
(KP 330.7 to KP 330.9) 
Glenavon Series 
(KP 817.2 to KP 817.9) 
Grill Lake Series 
(KP 213.3 to KP 213.9) 
(KP 215.5 to KP 215.8) 
(KP 272.0 to KP 272.3) 
(KP 347.4 to KP 348.9) 
(KP 350.7 to KP 350.9) 
Hilton Series  
(KP 1120.3 to KP 1120.4) 
Hughenden Series 
(KP 215.8 to KP 216.1) 
Kelstern Series 
(KP 325.3 to KP 326.3) 
(KP 327.1 to KP 327.3) 
(KP 327.5 to KP 328.2) 
Oxbow Series 
(KP 796.5 to KP 797.4) 
(KP 807.8 to KP 808.2) 
(KP 814.1 to KP 814.3) 
(KP 819.0 to KP 820.1) 
(KP 886.0 to KP 886.4) 

Footprint • Overstrip shallow topsoils (i.e., where topsoils are less than 10 cm deep) to include some of 
the upper subsoil, to a total depth of 10 cm (see Environmental Alignment Sheets). 

• For Dune Sand Series, salvage a minimum of 15 cm of upper material. 

• Minor amount of 
topsoil/subsoil mixing may 
occur due to shallow topsoil 
depths. 



 

P
age 6-56 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
2.1(f) lowering of topsoil capability 

through mixing due to shallow 
topsoils (cont’d) 

Scott Series 
(KP 289.7 to KP 290.0) 
(KP 290.2 to KP 290.5) 
Swift Creek Series 
(KP 820.3 to KP 820.5) 
Weyburn Series 
(KP 573.8 to KP 574.0) 
All locations of Dune Sand Series 

Same as above • Same as above • Same as above 

2.1(g) lowering of topsoil capability 
through mixing due to poor 
colour change 

Soil Series: 
Cathkin, Chaplin, Dune Sand, Gilroy, 
Grill Lake, Hanley, Hatton, Haverhill, 
Kelstern, Kettlehut, Oliver, Regina, 
Rosemae, Wingello  

Footprint • Where soils are not readily distinguishable by colour, the Environmental Inspector will 
provide direction based on an evaluation of soil texture and structure as well as the 
recommended depths noted on the Environmental Alignment Sheets. [EGC 02-5] 

• Minor amount of 
topsoil/subsoil mixing may 
occur due to poor colour 
change between topsoil and 
subsoil. 

2.2 Degradation of soil structure 
and lowering of soil capability 
through compaction and rutting 

Soil Series: 
Cazlake, Deadhorse, Desjarlais, Flat 
Lake, Glenavon, Glenboro, 
Gnadenthal, Grill Lake, Haight, Hairy 
Hill, Joyale, Knudson, Neunenberg, 
Oak Lake, Oliver, Osborne, Ramada, 
Regina 

Footprint • Confine traffic to the trench area and work side of the right-of-way to the extent practical to 
reduce the area subjected to potential soil compaction. 

• During wet/thawed conditions, implement the Wet/Thawed Soil Contingency Plan outlined in 
Appendix 6B. [EGC 02-5, 02-16] 

• Suspend all affected construction activity immediately upon indication of wet or thawing soils. 
Resume construction activities only after soils have sufficiently dried or frozen. [EGC 02-16] 

• Strip the full right-of-way on cultivated lands and poorly-sodded hay, pasture, native prairie 
and bush-pasture lands if activity cannot be suspended during wet or thawing soil conditions 
(Detail 6A-12). [EGC 02-16] 

• Postpone heavy traffic until soils dry or freeze if excessive rutting is expected.  
• Determine locations where subsoil compaction has occurred by comparing compaction levels 

on and off right-of-way. Sites compared should be in close proximity and have similar 
drainage, soil moisture, aspect and land use.  

• Rip compacted subsoils, temporary access trails and soils damaged during wet weather with 
a multishank ripper to a depth of 30 cm. [EGC 03-3] 

• Employ a subsoiler plow (e.g., Paratiller) along segments of the right-of-way where topsoil 
salvage did not occur and subsoil compaction is severe. Do not use a subsoiler plow on 
native prairie or bush lands. 

• Cultivate compacted areas of the right-of-way where it crosses fields, bush or woodlands to a 
depth adequate to alleviate surface compaction and in a manner acceptable to the 
landowner. Do not pulverize the soil. [EGC 03-3] 

• Cultivate hay and pasture land if the sod layer is broken or badly compacted. [EGC 03-3] 
• If soils are moist, postpone ripping of subsoils until soils dry to ensure that the soils fracture 

when ripped. If trench spoil is frozen, postpone compaction until final clean-up in mid to late 
spring. [EGC 03-2] 

• Use a disk plow or cultivator on ripped subsoils to break up lumps and to smooth the surface. 
[EGC 03-3] 

• Till or cultivate any severely compacted or rutted areas on cultivated, hay or non-native 
pasture lands with deep tillage device or chisel plow to loosen compacted soils. [EGC 03-3] 

• Blade rutted subsoils flat prior to soil replacement. 
• Lightly cultivate and reseed rutted soils under a vegetated cover. 
• Regrade areas with vehicle ruts. [EGC 03-3] 

• Minor amount of 
topsoil/subsoil mixing will 
occur during subsoil plowing or 
ripping to relieve compaction. 

• Minor amount of 
topsoil/subsoil mixing may 
occur due to rutting. 



 

P
age 6-57 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
2.3 Loss of topsoil through wind erosion    
2.3(a) general Entire route Footprint to Local • Do not salvage topsoil under extremely windy conditions. 

• Suspend topsoil handling operations if drifting or topsoil loss is evident. 
• Implement the Soil Erosion Contingency Plan (Appendix 6B) when wind erosion of the topsoil 

windrow is a concern. 
• Avoid scalping of the sod layer on pasture, bush, bush-pasture, hay lands and native prairie 

when moving the topsoil and spoil piles during backfill. Use equipment (e.g., clean-up 
bucket) for final pass of backfilling that will minimize scalping and that is approved by the 
Environmental Inspector. [EGC 03-2] 

• Rollback small diameter slash or thinly spread wood chips on wooded non-agricultural lands 
to provide microsites to promote germination of seed on dry or wind exposed sites of 
approved by the landowner. [EGC 03-3] 

• Avoid overpicking small diameter (less than 4 cm in diameter) slash will be avoided on 
wooded areas with sandy soils where slash rollback is not allowed or is not practical.  

• Refer to Details 6A-18, 6A-24, 6A-40 to 6A-49 for general soil erosion control measures. 

• Minor surface erosion of 
topsoil can be expected until a 
vegetative cover has been 
established. 

2.3(b) wind erosion prone soils Soil Series: 
Agassiz, Asquith, Alluvium, Biggar, 
Birkenhead, Bradwell, Cathkin, 
Chaplin, Deadhorse, Desjarlais, 
Dolcy, Dune Sand, Forget, Hatton, 
Knudson, Metiskow, Oak Lake, 
Regina, Scarth, Scollard, Stockton, 
Swift Creek, Vandal, Wainwright, 
Whitesand, Windthorst, Wingello  
 
PNT 780915  
(KP 195.9 to KP 196.8) 
PNT 780363 
(KP 196.8 to KP 197.7) 
PNT 731909 
(KP 220.4 to KP 220.6 and 
KP 227.1) 

Footprint to Local • Postpone topsoil stripping until 3 days prior to trenching if drifting soils or topsoil loss is 
evident. [EGC 02-5] If this is not practical: 
- limit the time between topsoil stripping and final clean-up; 
- suspend topsoil stripping and backfill operations during high winds; 
- apply a tackifier to the topsoil pile; and 
- install wind barriers (e.g., slat fences, snow fences).  

• Tackify or apply water or pack the topsoil windrow with a sheepsfoot packer or other 
approved equipment, if the assessment by the Environmental Inspector indicates that soils 
are likely to be prone to erosion by wind. 

• Walk down topsoil windrow and windrow snow over the windrow to minimize the risk of wind 
erosion during frozen conditions. Consider tackifying or watering down the topsoil windrow if 
snow is not available (Detail 6A-18). 

• To minimize drifting soils and loss of topsoil in areas prone to wind erosion [EGC 03-3]: 
- spread wood chips or straw crimp; 
- sow a fast growing cover crop; and/or 
- walk down tree and shrub debris (i.e., small diameter slash) over exposed soils.  

• Avoid scalping of the sod layer when moving the topsoil and subsoil piles during backfilling. 
[EGC 03-2] 

• Spread and incorporate straw into the upper soil horizon with a straw crimper on 
noncultivated lands with a high potential for wind erosion and on noncultivated lands that are 
difficult to revegetate and are, therefore, prone to erosion (Detail 6A-45). 

• Rollback small diameter slash or thinly spread wood chips on wooded non-agricultural lands 
to provide microsites to promote germination of seed on dry or wind exposed sites if 
approved by the landowner (Details 6A-5 and 6A-41).  

• Avoid overpicking of small diameter slash in wooded areas with erodible soils. 
• For intensely grazed lands, fence the right-of-way if practical until seedlings are well 

established and to prevent damage from livestock. [EGC 03-4]. 
• Monitor the right-of-way on a routine basis for the life of the pipeline. Issues related to 

erosion on slopes will be reported to Enbridge’s Environment, Health and Safety staff. 
Enbridge will employ applicable remedial measures on a timely basis. 

• Revegetation of some 
disturbed high wind erodible 
soils may be difficult. 



 

P
age 6-58 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
2.4 Loss of topsoil through surface water erosion    
2.4(a) general Entire route 

PNT 780915  
(KP 195.9 to KP 196.8) 
PNT 780363 
(KP 196.8 to KP 197.7) 
PNT 800392 
(KP 233.7) 

Footprint • Restrict root grubbing to the trench line, if feasible, to minimize surface disturbance. 
• Minimize grading throughout the route, especially at watercourses, wetlands and on native 

prairie, pasture, bush and bush-pasture lands with a competent sod layer. Minimize the width 
of grading in order to limit the potential for erosion and subsoil compaction. [EGC 02-7] 

• Backfill the trench in lifts and compact after each lift, if warranted, at locations where a wider 
than normal trench (e.g., sharp sidebends, bell holes) is necessary.  

• Crown the trench with remaining spoil to allow for settlement. [EGC 03-2] 
• Leave breaks in the trench crown at obvious drainages and wherever seepage occurs to 

minimize interference with natural drainage. Leave breaks in the crown at frequent intervals 
where sidehill is encountered. Compact backfill where breaks have been left. [EGC 02-8, 03-
2] 

• Feather out excess spoil over the stripped area to create a smooth mound. 
• Recontour the right-of-way and restore the preconstruction grades and drainage channels. 

[EGC 03-3] 
• Regrade areas with vehicle ruts, erosion gullies or where the trench has settled. [EGC 03-3] 
• Implement the Soil Erosion Contingency Plan (Appendix 6B) when water erosion of the 

topsoil windrow is a concern. 

• Minor surface erosion of 
topsoil can be expected until a 
vegetative cover has been 
established. 

2.4(b) surface water erosion on 
moderately steep slopes 

Moderate to Steep Slopes 
See Environmental Alignment 
Sheets 

Footprint • Restrict root grubbing on steep erosion prone slopes in order to minimize soil disturbance 
and erosion. 

• Minimize grading on moderately steep slopes. [EGC 02-7] 
• Install temporary berms on approach slopes to watercourses and erect silt fences near the 

base of approach slopes to watercourses following grading (Detail 6A-24). Inspect the 
temporary erosion control structures on a daily basis and repair, if warranted, before the end 
of each working day. [EGC 02-13, 02-14] 

• Install trench breakers (sack, foam or bentonite) where warranted on moderately steep and 
steep slopes to control subsurface flow (Detail 6A-20). Exact location of breakers will be 
determined in the field. However, general locations where breakers may be needed are 
shown on the Environmental Alignment Sheets. Mark location of each breaker prior to 
backfilling to facilitate correct placement of diversion berm immediately downslope of the 
breaker. [EGC 02-13, 02-15, 03-2] 

• Install subdrains as directed by Enbridge’s engineer where there is evidence of seepage or 
flowing spring on a slope once the trench is excavated (Detail 6A-19). [EGC 02-13, 03-2] 

• Follow mitigative measures outlined in the Detailed Crossing Construction Plan for the South 
Saskatchewan River Valley to be undertaken by Enbridge prior to construction (see 
Section 9.0 of the ESA). 

• Install cross ditches and berms on moderately steep slopes on pasture, bush and bush-
pasture lands in order to prevent run-off along the right-of-way and subsequent erosion 
(Detail 6A-23). Exact locations of berms will be determined in the field. However, general 
locations where berms will be installed are shown on the Environmental Alignment Sheets. 
Tie berms into existing erosion control structures on adjacent right-of-way. Install berms 
immediately downslope of all breakers on moderately steep slopes. [EGC 02-13, 03-9] 

• When replacing sidehills or other graded areas is not practical due to the risk of slope failure 
or ovalling of the pipe, recontour slopes to grades not exceeding 1:3 (rise over run) or as 
advised by a geotechnical engineer. [EGC 03-3] 

• Minor surface erosion of 
topsoil can be expected until a 
vegetative cover has been 
established. 



 

P
age 6-59 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
2.4(b) surface water erosion on 

moderately steep slopes 
(cont’d) 

Same as above Same as above • Revegetate moderately steep noncultivated slopes with a cover crop and a seed mix 
appropriate for the location (Details 6A-46, 6A-49). [EGC 03-4]  

• Employ straw crimping where warranted on lands with high water erosion potential 
(Detail 6A-45). 

• Monitor the right-of-way on a routine basis for the life of the pipeline. Issues related to 
erosion on slopes will be reported to Enbridge’s Environment, Health and Safety staff. 
Enbridge will employ applicable remedial measures on a timely basis. 

• Same as above 

2.5 Increased stoniness in surface 
horizons 

Entire route Footprint • Attempt to use conventional equipment to strip topsoil. Employ backhoe, if above measure is 
ineffective. [EGC 02-5] 

• Remove stones to achieve equivalence with the surrounding subsoil/topsoil as well as stones 
from the upper 30 cm of soil that will interfere with topsoil replacement or cultivation (i.e., 
stones larger than 10 cm in diameter). [EGC 03-3] 

• Dispose of stones at locations approved by the landowner or government land authority. Do 
not dispose of stones in wetlands. [EGC 03-3] 

• Monitor the right-of-way during operations for presence of stones at the surface and 
remediate if stoniness interferes with agricultural practices.  

• Stone picking may result in 
disposal issues. 

2.6 Bedrock or large boulders 
within trench depth 

Entire route 
Lands adjacent to canal at KP 498.4 

Footprint • Rip bedrock within trench depth, if encountered and if feasible. Ripping is preferred over 
blasting. 

• Use a trenched crossing method at the canal located at KP 498.4 if large boulders preclude a 
trenchless crossing method. 

• Do not backfill large rocks in the upper 0.5 m of the trench on agricultural lands during final 
clean-up. 

• Ensure that bedding or padding material is not deposited on unstripped topsoil prior to 
placement in the trench unless otherwise approved by the appropriate land authority. 

• Dispose of excess rock displaced from the trench or from blasting by windrowing, scattering, 
placing in discrete piles or as directed by the landowner or government land authority. Do not 
dispose of rocks in wetlands. [EGC 02-8, 03-2, 03-3] 

• Import additional or replacement backfill if warranted from locations approved by the 
applicable regulatory authority. 

• Removal of bedrock slab or 
large boulders from trench 
depth may result in disposal 
issues. 

• Use of sand as bedding and 
padding material may result in 
reduced capability of soils 
adjacent to the trench. 

2.7 Pulverization of soil and sod Entire route Footprint • Restrict construction traffic where the potential for pulverization of soil or sod is high. 
• Provide alternate access to the right-of-way, if feasible, to avoid unnecessary travel. 
• Strip topsoil or water-spray areas where heavy traffic is anticipated as well as extremely dry 

areas to minimize loss of topsoil. 
• Lightly cultivate, harrow, seed and straw crimp pulverized sod if necessary (Soil/Sod 

Pulverization Contingency Plan in Appendix 6B). 

• Pulverization resulting in 
fugitive dust and loss of soil 
can be expected during dry 
conditions. 

• Pulverization of soil due to 
rutting may result in minor 
topsoil/subsoil mixing. 

2.8 Disturbance of soils in the 
Sounding Dunes, Elbow PFRA, 
Oak Lake Sand Hills and Souris 
Sand Hills 

Sounding Dunes 
(KP 217.5 to KP 230.8) 
Elbow PFRA 
(KP 560.3 to KP 566.4) 
Oak Lake Sand Hills  
(KP 1009 to KP 1011.8) 
Souris Sand Hills  
(KP 1020.9 to KP 1026.0) 

Footprint • Follow measures outlined in Detail 6A-50 for construction and reclamation of these areas. 
• Follow measures outlined in the Environmental Assessment Plan for the Elbow PFRA 

Community Pasture (see Appendix V of the ESA). 

• Revegetation of soils within 
the Sounding Dunes, Elbow 
PFRA Community Pasture, 
Oak Lake Sand Hills and 
Souris Sand Hills may be 
difficult. 



 

P
age 6-60 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
2.9 Disturbance of previously 

contaminated soil 
See Physical Environment element 
1.5 of this table 

Footprint • Identify hydrocarbon-impacted soils by odour or visual inspection. 
• Notify Enbridge's Environment, Health and Safety staff in the event that contaminated soils 

are encountered during ground disturbance activities. Enbridge's Environment, Health and 
Safety staff will be responsible for determining the appropriate course of action using their 
established guidelines on file with the NEB (i.e., Enbridge Operating & Maintenance 
Procedures, Book 3: Contaminated Soil Management, Section 04-02-024). 

• See Physical Environment element 1.5 of this table for landfill measures. 

• See Physical Environment 
element 1.5 of this table. 

2.10 Pivot irrigated lands Locations identified during Terrace 
Phase I and CEP and during fall 
2006 overflight: 
KP 511.4 to KP 513.0 
KP 513.3 to KP 514.3 
KP 514.9 to KP 517.1 
KP 660.1 to KP 660.9 
KP 1088.3 to KP 1088.7 
KP 1089.9 to KP 1090.7 
KP 1092.4 to KP 1093.2 

Footprint • See Water Quality and Quantity element 3.6 and Human Occupancy and Resource Use 
element 11.1(e) of this table. 

• See Water Quality and 
Quantity element 3.6 and 
Human Occupancy and 
Resource Use element 11.1(e) 
of this table. 

2.11 Flood irrigated lands Locations identified during Terrace 
Phase I and CEP: 
KP 509.7 to KP 510.5 
KP 510.5 to KP 511.3 
KP 513.0 to KP 513.3 
KP 514.3 to KP 514.9 
KP 654.4 to KP 654.8 
Additional locations identified by 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority: 
KP 301.2 to KP 301.5 

Footprint • See Water Quality and Quantity element 3.7 and Human Occupancy and Resource Use 
element 11.1(f) of this table. 

• See Water Quality and 
Quantity element 3.7 and 
Human Occupancy and 
Resource Use element 11.1(f) 
of this table. 

2.12 Trench subsidence Entire route Footprint • Compact backfilled trench to the extent feasible, using suitable equipment along the 
trenchline (e.g., grader) during nonfrozen conditions. Alternative methods of compaction may 
be used if approved by Enbridge's engineer. 

• Leave a slight crown over the trench to compensate for settlement. A larger crown will be 
needed during frozen conditions, to compensate for settlement after thawing. 

• Minor trench subsidence or a 
remnant crown may occur. 

3. WATER QUALITY AND QUANTITY 
3.1 Alteration of natural flow 

patterns 
Entire route Footprint to Local • Note that standard pipeline construction activities are designed to avoid circumstances that 

result in diversion and/or unnatural retention of water along the right-of-way. 
• Leave gaps in the topsoil windrow, if warranted, at obvious drainage courses to 

accommodate surface runoff. [EGC 02-8] 
• Follow measures in Detail 6A-22 should grade or topsoil replacement be delayed. 
• Install trench breakers, where warranted, at the edge of perched wetlands to prevent the pipe 

trench from acting as a drain (Detail 6A-20). 
• Compact backfill to the extent feasible and crown trench to prevent channelized flow along 

the trench. Avoid excessive trench crown height. [EGC 03-2] 
• Feather-out excess spoil over the stripped portion of the right-of-way to minimize the creation 

of a permanent mound. [EGC 03-2] 
• Leave breaks in the trench crown at drainages, on sidehill terrain and wherever seepage 

occurs. [EGC 03-2] 

• Minor localized alteration of 
natural drainage patterns may 
occur until trench settlement is 
complete. 



 

P
age 6-61 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
3.1 Alteration of natural flow 

patterns (cont’d) 
Same as above Same as above • Remove swamp mats or geotextile material where used to gain access across localized wet 

areas as part of final clean-up. 
• Restore right-of-way drainage patterns to as close to preconstruction contours as practical 

during reclamation. [EGC 03-3] 
• Regrade areas with vehicle ruts, erosion gullies or where the trench has settled. [EGC 03-3] 
• Unless culverts were installed during surface preparation activities, remove bar ditch ramps 

to prevent blockage of spring runoff in ditches during rough clean-up along segments of the 
route constructed during frozen conditions. During final clean-up, remove any remaining bar 
ditch ramps, then seed and fertilize accordingly. 

• See also Wetlands element 7.2 of this table. 

• Same as above 

3.2 Locations with high water table Soil Series: 
Cathkin, Cazlake, Desjarlais, 
Deadhorse, Flat Lake, Gnadenthal, 
Grill Lake, Haight, Hairy Hills, 
Neuenberg, Oak Lake, Osborne 

Footprint to Local • Dewater the trench using sumps and pump where warranted into bar ditches or stable 
vegetation. Slope trench walls to maintain stability as necessary. [EGC 02-17] 

• Use buoyancy controls for the pipe as required.  
• Remove all mats and ramps used to enable work and travel through wet areas and all bar 

ditch ramps in order that they do not impede the restoration of natural flow patterns.  
• See also Wetlands element 7.2 of this table. 

• No residual effect identified. 

3.3 Disruption of streamflow Waterbodies Footprint to Local • Prevent the felling of trees into watercourses during clearing. Immediately remove any trees 
that fall across or into watercourses. [EGC 02-4] 

• Maintain flow during instream construction at all watercourses where water is present and 
not frozen to the bottom by isolating the work areas (e.g., dam and pump or flume) or utilizing 
a trenchless crossing technique (e.g., HDD) (Details 6A-31 to 6A-36). Store spoil on banks 
unless otherwise approved by the appropriate authority. Complete instream construction as 
quickly as possible.  

• Install appropriate crossing method for vehicles and construction equipment over 
watercourses so that flow is not impeded (see Table 6.3). 

• Disruption of streamflow due to withdrawal of hydrostatic test water is addressed in Water 
Quality and Quantity element 3.10 of this table. 

• Disruption of streamflow and the potential impact to navigability of watercourses are 
addressed in Human Occupancy and Resource Use element 11.1(j) of this table. 

• No residual effect identified. 

3.4 Disruption of flow in drains Rosenheim Drain (KP 1220.2) 
Buffalo Drain (KP 1224.3) 

Footprint to Local • Obtain crossing permits for drain crossings. Follow all permit conditions. 
• Determine the pipe burial depth at drains in consultation with the appropriate authority. 
• Restore trenched drain crossings to preconstruction conditions. 

• No residual effect identified. 

3.5 Alteration of canals and 
drainage ditches 

Canals: 
KP 498.4, KP 507.8, KP 509.5, 
KP 510.0, KP 510.3, KP 511.2, 
KP 512.4, KP 513.3, KP 514.5, 
KP 515.0 
Drainage Ditches: 
KP 416.2 
KPR 40.9 

Footprint to Local • Obtain crossing permits for canals and drainage ditches. Follow all permit conditions. 
• Notify water management groups of the details regarding their project prior to construction. 
• Bore canals and other ditches, where practical, to prevent the alteration of drainage projects. 

(Detail 6A-34). Past construction programs at the canal at KP 498.6 have encountered large 
boulders at this location resulting in a trenched crossing. 

• Determine the pipe burial depth at canals and drainage ditches in consultation with the 
appropriate authority. 

• Restore trenched canals and drainage ditch crossings to preconstruction conditions. 

• No residual effect identified. 



 

P
age 6-62 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
3.6 Pivot irrigated systems Locations identified during Terrace 

Phase I and CEP, and during fall 
2006 overflight: 
KP 511.4 to KP 513.0 
KP 513.3 to KP 514.3 
KP 514.9 to KP 517.1 
KP 660.1 to KP 660.9 
KP 1088.3 to KP 1088.7 
KP 1089.9 to KP1090.7 
KP 1092.4 to KP 1093.2 

Footprint • Schedule construction to avoid the irrigation season if practical. 
• Refer to Detail 6A-9 for detailed mitigation measures for pivot irrigated lands. 
• Take particular care to ensure adequate compaction of the trench at pivot wheel crossings 

during backfilling. Install a steel plate at pivot wheel crossings if adequate compaction cannot 
be accomplished. [EGC 03-2] 

• Inspect and monitor trench before and during the first irrigation season to determine the 
success of the trench compaction and levelling. [EGC 03-2] 

• See Human Occupancy and 
Resource Use element 11.1(e) 
of this table. 

3.7 Flood irrigated systems Locations identified during Terrace 
Phase I and CEP: 
KP 509.7 to KP 510.5 
KP 510.5 to KP 511.3 
KP 513.0 to KP 513.3 
KP 514.3 to KP 514.9 
KP 654.4 to KP 654.8 
Additional locations identified by 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority: 
KP 301.2 to KP 301.5 

Footprint • Schedule construction to avoid the irrigation season if practical. 
• Refer to Detail 6A-9 for detailed mitigation measures for flood irrigated lands. 
• Prepare a surveyed right-of-way profile prior to construction on flood irrigated lands. 
• Install trench breakers on flood irrigated lands, where warranted, to force groundwater 

seepage along the pipeline trench to the surface. 
• Install temporary sack trench breakers on long slopes on flood-irrigated fields, where 

warranted, when built during frozen conditions. 
• Backfill the trench on flood irrigated land in two (min.) separate lifts. Compact after each lift.  
• Recontour the right-of-way to preconstruction condition profile and re-establish border dikes. 

[EGC 03-3] 
• Inspect and monitor trench before and during the first irrigation season to determine the 

success of the trench compaction and levelling. [EGC 03-2] 

• See Human Occupancy and 
Resource Use element 11.1(f) 
of this table. 

3.8 Reduction of surface water 
quality 

Waterbodies Footprint to Local • Follow the recommended pipeline crossing techniques and vehicle crossing method for each 
watercourse encountered along the route (see Table 6.3). Recommended crossing 
techniques were selected based on the sensitivity of each watercourse to the introduction of 
silt and to increased potential for sedimentation and turbidity as well as the channel 
configuration and streamfow (Details 6A-25 to 6A-36). 

• Restrict grading to trench line and work areas where practical. [EGC 02-7] 
• Direct grading away from watercourse to reduce the risk of material entering the 

watercourse. Do not place fill material in a watercourse during grading. [EGC 02-7] 
• Minimize grading within 16 m buffer of undisturbed vegetation on each stream bank. If 

grading within the buffer, install temporary sediment barriers to prevent sediment from 
flowing back into the stream. [EGC 02-7] 

• Adhere to the following spill prevention measures: prohibit fuel storage, refuelling or servicing 
of equipment near watercourses except where secondary containment is provided; and 
ensure equipment used for instream construction is well maintained and free of fluid leaks. 
[EGC 02-2] 

• In the event of a spill, immediately implement measures to stop, control the migration of, and 
clean-up the spilled substance as outlined in the Spill Contingency Plan in Appendix 6B (see 
also Accidents and Malfunctions element 18.1 of this table).  

• Install berms, cross ditches and/or silt fences between wetlands and disturbed areas to 
prevent siltation of surface water (Details 6A-23 and 6A-24). Ensure silt fences have been 
installed properly, are solid and filter fabric is tight. 

• See also Wetlands element 7.3 of this table. 

• Reduction in surface water 
quality due to suspended 
solids during instream 
construction. 



 

P
age 6-63 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
3.9 Reduction of groundwater quality and quantity    
3.9(a) general Entire route Footprint to Local • Monitor all registered or known water wells within 200 m of any blasting before and after 

blasting. Provide alternate water supply, if warranted, where well monitoring indicates that a 
reduction in water quality or quantity has occurred due to blasting. 

• Adhere to the following spill prevention measures: prohibit fuel storage, refuelling or servicing 
of equipment near watercourses except where secondary containment is provided; and 
ensure equipment used for instream construction is well maintained and free of fluid leaks. 
[EGC 02-2] 

• In the event of a spill, immediately implement measures to stop, control the migration of, and 
clean-up the spilled substance as outlined in the Spill Contingency Plan in Appendix 6B (see 
also Accidents and Malfunctions element 18.1 of this table).  

• Implement the Directional Drilling Procedures and Instream Drilling Mud Release 
Contingency Plan outlined in Appendix 6B in the event of a release during instream 
construction at locations where a HDD is to be used (see also Accidents and Malfunctions 
element 18.4 of this table).  

• Although unlikely, the 
disruption of water well flows 
may occur. 

• See Accidents and 
Malfunctions element 18.4 of 
this table for discussion of the 
residual effect associated with 
a release of instream drilling 
mud. 

3.9(b) aquifers Oak Lake Aquifer 
(KP 975 to KP 1034) 
Assiniboine Delta Aquifer 
(KP 1080 to KP 1110) 
KP 1119 to KP 1142 
(near Swan Lake Indian Reserve) 
Winkler Aquifer  
(KP 1207 to KP 1219) 

Footprint to Local • A specialized integrity assessment program is recommended that encompasses the design, 
construction and operation phases of the pipeline segments near the Oak Lake, Assiniboine 
and Winkler aquifers as well as the aquifer near the Swan Lake Indian Reserve. The integrity 
assessment program should ensure that the Alberta Clipper pipeline in the vicinity of aquifers 
is designed, constructed and operated in a manner that limits the potential for product 
release into an aquifer and minimizes the effect should a release occur. The program should 
include, at a minimum, an evaluation of the following potential mitigative strategies and the 
selection of measures appropriate for the proposed Alberta Clipper pipeline project: 
- increase the minimum depth of cover to 1.5 m to limit the potential for third party 

damage; 
- increase the frequency of internal corrosion checks; 
- optimize valve location and spacing to limit the amount of product that could be 

released;  
- increase the wall thickness of the pipe; and 
- ensure adequate cathodic protection of the pipe. 

• Confirm that the Enbridge Emergency Response Plan has measures in place to promptly 
and effectively respond to a release of product in the vicinity of an aquifer. 

• Develop a plan to identify alternate water supplies and commit to provide alternate water 
sources to affected parties, if warranted, in the event an accidental release of product by 
Enbridge that adversely affects an aquifer. 

• No residual effect identified. 

3.9(c) springs KP 616.0 
KP 1242.5 to KP 1245.2 

Footprint to Local • Recontour slopes to pre-construction profile. 
• If springs are encountered along the route, install trench breakers to force groundwater 

seepage along the pipeline trench to the surface. [EGC 03-2] Install subdrains if warranted, 
to divert shallow groundwater flow from the right-of-way. [EGC 03-2] 

• Potential minor short-term 
disruption of groundwater flow 
where springs are 
encountered. 

3.9(d) disruption of groundwater flow 
in areas characterized by sands 
overlying clays at shallow 
depths 

shallow Stockton Series 
(KP 1083.7 to KP 1084.2) 
(KP 1197.7 to KP 1200.1) 

Footprint • Conduct three-lift soil handling on lands characterized by sands overlying clays at shallow 
depths as indicated on the Environmental Alignment Sheets to maintain groundwater flow 
(Details 6A-15, 6A-16). 

• Strip upper subsoils from an area twice the width of the trench and to the depth indicated on 
the Environmental Alignment Sheets. 

• Store topsoil on the spoil side of the trench next to the stripped area. [EGC 02-5] 

• No residual effect identified. 



 

P
age 6-64 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
3.9(d) disruption of groundwater flow 

in areas characterized by sands 
overlying clays at shallow 
depths (cont’d) 

Same as above Same as above • Salvage and store the upper subsoil separately from the lower subsoil at locations where 
three-lift soils handling is required and grading is necessary. 

• Store the first lift of trench subsoil on the spoil side, either next to the trench or back far 
enough to store the second lift. Maintain a separation between the topsoil pile and the 
subsoil piles, and also between subsoil piles. [EGC 02-5] 

• Backfill each lift in the correct sequence to ensure that lower clayey subsoils do not mix with 
sandy upper subsoil horizons. 

• Same as above 

3.10 Withdrawal and release of 
hydrostatic test water 

Test locations Footprint to Local • Conduct all hydrostatic testing activities in accordance with the NEB Onshore Pipeline 
Regulations, provincial regulations as well as the latest version of CSA Z662. 

• Shunt test water ahead from test section to test section to the extent possible to minimize 
water hauling, water usage and number of dewatering points.  

• Collect and analyze water samples from potential sources of water and hydrostatic test 
water.  

• Screen and locate test water intakes to prevent the intake of fish and fish eggs. [EGC 02-18] 
• Isolate fill pumps from bodies of water with an impermeable lined dike or depression to 

prevent spills of fuels or lubricants from entering a body of water. 
• The withdrawal rate and volume will not exceed 5% of the flow rate of the watercourse or of 

the volume of the body of water unless otherwise approved by the appropriate authority. 
[EGC 02-18] 

• Ensure water hauling trucks for test water, if used, are clean and inspected prior to use. 
• Discharge water into bar ditches where feasible. 
• If test water is released into a natural water body, ensure that the appropriate testing and 

treatment measures are implemented in accordance with provincial regulations related to 
discharging hydrostatic test water.  

• Release the source water within the same watershed from where it was withdrawn. [EGC 
02-18] 

• Discharge water must not be more than 2°C warmer or cooler than a receiving body of water 
if the receiving body of water supports sport fish. [EGC 02-18] 

• Control the discharge rate of test water to reduce the potential for soil erosion. [EGC 02-18] 
• Install energy diffusers and plywood sheeting, tarpaulins or other similar material to reduce 

the risk of soil erosion. Reduce the discharge rate if erosion becomes evident. [EGC 02-18] 
• See Human Occupancy and Resource Use element 11.1(k) of this table for discussion on 

potential affect of withdrawal of hydrostatic test water on downstream water users. 

• No residual effect identified. 

4. GREENHOUSE GASES AND AIR QUALITY 
4.1 Project contribution to 

greenhouse gas emissions  
Entire route --- • Utilize multi-passenger vehicles for the transport of crews to and from job sites to the extent 

practical to minimize emissions during construction. 
• Minimize the amount of GHG emissions associated with clearing of vegetation by following 

existing linear disturbances where feasible. 

• Incremental increase in GHG 
emissions during pipeline 
construction. 

4.2 Airborne emissions from 
equipment during construction 

Entire route Footprint to Local • Use well maintained equipment to minimize emissions. 
• Minimize unnecessary idling of equipment. 
• Use multi-passenger vehicles to transport crew to site to the extent practical to limit the 

amount of traffic and accompanying emissions. 

• Increase in vehicle emissions 
will occur during pipeline 
construction. 



 

P
age 6-65 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
4.3 Dust during construction Entire route Footprint to Local • Apply water to exposed soil piles if wind erosion occurs. [EGC 02-2] Water is preferred over 

chemical dust suppressant applications.  
• Apply water to the right-of-way and access roads if traffic and wind conditions result in 

pulverized soils and dust problems. [EGC 02-2] 
• Suspend topsoil stripping and replacement during strong winds to control dust. [EGC 02-2] 

• Increase in dust arising from 
pipeline construction traffic on 
the right-of-way will occur. 

4.4 Smoke during construction Bush/wooded areas Footprint to Local • Obtain applicable permits prior to burning slash. 
• Avoid locating burn piles on topsoil within agricultural lands. Locate burn piles on exposed 

mineral soils stripped of their topsoil or in a burning sloop. [EGC 02-4] 
• Locate burn piles at least 100 m from a waterbody. [EGC 02-4] 

• Increase in smoke arising from 
burning of slash along the 
pipeline route will occur. 

4.5 Emissions during operations 
and maintenance 

Entire route Footprint to Local • Use well maintained equipment during maintenance activities to minimize emissions. • Slight rise in air emissions will 
occur during site-specific 
maintenance activities along 
the route. 

5. ACOUSTIC ENVIRONMENT 
5.1 Noise from construction 

equipment 
Entire route Footprint to Local • Ensure that noise abatement equipment (e.g., mufflers) on machinery is in good working 

order to control noise levels. Take reasonable measures to control construction related noise 
near residential areas. Alter equipment, erect noise barriers, or change the work schedule if 
excessive noise becomes a nuisance to nearby residents. [EC 02-2] 

• Schedule hours of work within communities between 7 AM and 8 PM, or as specified in the 
community bylaws. [EGC 01-3] 

• Schedule construction to avoid periods of peak use of facilities within communities or special 
events, if practical. 

• Schedule hours of work at locations along the route where residences are located within 
250 m to the period from 7 AM and 7 PM. 

• Increase in noise will occur 
during pipeline construction. 

5.2 Noise during operations and 
maintenance 

Entire route Footprint to Local • An increase in noise emissions during the operation of the pipeline is not expected. 
• Confine maintenance work to between 7 AM and 7 PM in proximity to permanent residences 

unless otherwise stated in the local bylaws or as approved by the appropriate authority. 
• Maintain equipment used to conduct maintenance activities to minimize unnecessary noise 

(e.g., mufflers). 

• Slight rise in noise levels 
during site-specific 
maintenance activities along 
the route. 

6. FISH AND FISH HABITAT 
6.1 Riparian habitat loss and alteration    
6.1(a) general All watercourse crossings  Footprint to Local General 

• Adhere to all approvals, permits and authorizations issued by regulatory authorities. Any 
alternatives or alterations to crossing requirements specified in approvals, permits and 
authorizations must be approved prior to commencement of crossing construction. [EGC 
02-11] 

• Use the vehicle and pipeline crossing methods recommended for each crossing (Table 6.3), 
which have been selected using data collected during field investigations and the public 
consultation program, as well as previous construction programs, to reduce direct and 
indirect effects on productive fish habitat. [EGC 01-5, EGC 02-2, EGC 02-11, EGC 02-12] 

• Clearing or disturbance of 
riparian vegetation associated 
with watercourses within right-
of-way and temporary work 
space will occur. 



 

P
age 6-66 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
6.1(a) general (cont’d) Same as above Same as above Vehicle Crossings 

• Install vehicle crossings on adjacent previously disturbed right-of-way, if practical, in order to 
minimize clearing and grading requirements at the proposed crossing. [EGC 02-7, EGC 
02-11] 

• Remove vehicle crossing structures when no longer required. Restore and stabilize 
streambeds, banks and other disturbed areas. [EGC 02-12] 

• Remove vehicle crossing structures prior to freeze-up during summer construction and prior 
to break-up during winter construction. 

Clearing and Grading 
• Minimize grading when constructing temporary bridges or snow/ice fill crossings. [EGC 02-7, 

EGC 02-11] 
• Postpone clearing of watercourse approach slopes and banks until immediately prior to 

crossing construction except, if required, to install vehicle crossing structures. Where earlier 
clearing is approved by the appropriate authority, leave the vegetative ground mat and root 
structure intact. [EGC 02-4] 

• Leave a temporary uncleared buffer zone extending back from the crest of erosion prone 
approach slopes where practical. [EGC 02-4] 

• Restrict grading to the trench line and work area where feasible. [EGC 02-7, EGC 02-11] 
Only permit grading in the vicinity of watercourses if required to ensure that silt laden surface 
water flow does not enter a watercourse. 

• Grade away from watercourses in order to reduce the risk of material entering a watercourse. 
[EGC 02-7] 

• Store graded material away from the flood plain of the watercourse. [EGC 02-7] 
• Minimize clearing and ground disturbance within 16 m of the high water mark of all 

waterbodies to the degree practical. [EGC 02-4] Locate extra work space a minimum of 16 m 
away from the water's edge, if practical. [EGC 01-6] 

Pipeline Crossings 
• Ensure all necessary equipment and materials are on site and ready for installation prior to 

commencing water crossing construction. Complete pipe stringing, welding, pretesting (if 
necessary), coating and weighting prior to commencement of instream construction. 

Restoration of Banks 
• Salvage surface organic material (e.g., low vegetation, leaf litter, partially decomposed 

organic matter) with the upper topsoil (to the depth of the root zone) from watercourse banks 
for reclamation, if it can be removed intact.  

• Stabilize banks and approach slopes and install temporary berms, silt fences, or cross 
ditches in any location where run-off from the right-of-way may flow into a watercourse 
(Details 6A-23 and 6A-24). [EGC 02-13, EGC 02-14] 

• Install temporary erosion control measures within 24 hours of backfilling crossings. [EGC 
02-11] Commence clean-up immediately following backfill and erosion control operations. 

• Recontour banks with salvaged surface organic material (if removed intact), and protect with 
coconut matting or equivalent, if necessary to stabilize. Plant willow stakes to anchor matting 
and provide additional stability where shrubs existed prior to construction (Details 6A-42, 
6A-38). [EGC 03-4, EGC 03-7] 

• Same as above 



 

P
age 6-67 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
6.1(a) general (cont’d) Same as above Same as above Restoration of Banks 

• Seed riparian areas with an approved native cover crop and seed mix as soon as feasible 
after construction (prior to spring freshet wherever possible) (Details 6A-49, 6A-46). [EGC 
03-5] 

• Transplant shrubs or install willow stakes during reclamation of streambanks where 
shrubbery is present prior to construction (Detail 6A-38). [EGC 03-3, EGC 03-7] 

• Armour streambanks, where warranted, to provide adequate erosion control (Detail 6A-37). 
• Fence off reclaimed areas to prevent damage by cattle, where appropriate. 
• Follow mitigative measures outlined in the Detailed Crossing Construction Plan for the South 

Saskatchewan River Valley to be undertaken by Enbridge prior to construction (see 
Section 9.0 of the ESA).  

Monitoring 
• Inspect approach slopes and banks regularly, especially after heavy rainfalls and spring 

freshet for two years after construction. Continue monitoring at specific locations if chronic 
erosion occurs, or if riparian vegetation recovery is delayed. Take remedial action to address 
soil erosion problems or delayed vegetation recovery, as warranted. 

• Same as above 

6.2 Instream habitat loss and 
alteration  

All watercourse crossings Footprint to Local General 
• Fish population and aquatic habitat inventories were conducted at watercourse crossings 

along the route for CEP, Terrace Phases I and II, and at select locations in October 2006 
along the Alberta Clipper pipeline route from KP 959.3 to KP 1245.2.  

• Discussions with DFO regarding the proposed watercourse crossings are ongoing. Enbridge 
will, where warranted, request from DFO a letter of advice for determination of whether 
HADD of fish habitat could occur. 

• Adhere to all approvals, permits and authorizations issued by regulatory authorities. Any 
alternatives or alterations to crossing requirements specified in approvals, permits and 
authorizations must be approved prior to commencement of crossing construction. [EGC 
02-11] 

• Use the vehicle and pipeline crossing methods recommended for each crossing (Table 6.3), 
which have been selected using data collected during field investigations and the public 
consultation program, as well as previous construction programs, to reduce direct and 
indirect effects on productive fish habitat (Details 6A-25 to 6A-36). [EGC 01-5, EGC 02-2, 
EGC 02-11, EGC 02-12] Refer to Fish and Fish Habitat element 6.1(a) of this table for 
additional measures relating to vehicle crossings. 

• Adhere to RAPs (see Table 6.3) [EGC 01-3] and limit instream work period to less than one 
working day wherever practical. [EGC 02-11] 

• Fall trees away from watercourses. Immediately remove trees, debris or soil inadvertently 
deposited below the high water mark of watercourses. [EGC 02-4] 

• Contour and stabilize banks and approach slopes, and install temporary berms, silt fences, 
or cross ditches at any location where run-off from the right-of-way may flow into a 
watercourse (Details 6A-24, 6A-23). [EGC 02-13, EGC 02-14] 

• Construct hard ditch plugs at least 3 m wide and leave in place to protect banks from 
sloughing at isolated and open cut crossings until construction of the crossing has been 
initiated. [EGC 02-8] 

• Complete welding, coating, weighting and, where applicable, pretesting, of the pipe prior to 
commencement of trenching and ensure that sufficient equipment is available to move long 
heavy sections of pipe efficiently at wide crossings. 

• Alteration of instream habitat 
within zone-of-influence at 
trenched crossings will occur. 



 

P
age 6-68 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
6.2 Instream habitat loss and 

alteration (cont’d) 
Same as above Same as above Open Cut Crossing Technique 

• Where use of an open cut crossing method is planned (see Table 6.3), salvage the upper 
substrate material and stockpile separately to cap the trench during backfilling (Detail 6A-30). 
[EGC 02-11, EGC 03-2] Trench through watercourse. Retain hard plugs at each bank until 
just prior to pipe installation. 

• If necessary to control subsurface water flow and trench sloughing, install temporary soft 
plugs and dewater the trench onto stable surfaces in a manner that does not cause erosion 
of soils, sedimentation of watercourses or where icing will not be a problem. [EGC 02-17] 

• Pile all spoil on the banks if feasible. Construct a temporary storage area for spoil above the 
high watermark of the watercourse if spoil is likely to be highly saturated. Excavate a pit or 
construct berms of packed earth, staked straw bales or swamp weights, if warranted, to 
prevent spoil or silty water from flowing back into the watercourse. Containment berms and 
spoil should be back from the streambank. Note that the vegetative buffers are to be 
maintained and, consequently, spoil may require stockpiling back from the banks. 

• Return salvaged streambed surface material (or material of equivalent quality) to top layer of 
backfill. [EGC 02-11, EGC 03-2] Where granular material is encountered at the surface 
during excavation, cap the trench with 0.5 m of clean granular material. 

• Maintain or restore natural drainage and channel configurations. [EGC 02-2, EGC 03-2] 
• Return aquatic vegetation and organic debris removed from the construction area following 

trench backfilling. 
Isolation Crossing Technique 
• Where an isolation crossing method is planned (see Table 6.3), implement the measures 

indicated on Details 6A-31, 6A-32, 6A-33 and 6A-36 to reduce sediment input, including the 
following: 
- ensure water from flumes, dam and pumps, diversions or other methods do not cause 

erosion or introduce sediment into the channel; [EGC 02-8] 
- construct a sump with berms, silt fences or straw bale filters to contain excavated 

instream spoil so that it does not re-enter the waterbody; [EGC 02-8] 
- do not use earthen berms to isolate the crossing construction area; 
- salvage upper substrate material and stockpile separately to cap the trench during 

backfilling; [EGC 02-11, EGC 03-2] 
- dewater the trench onto stable surfaces in a manner that does not cause erosion of 

soils, sedimentation of watercourse, or where icing will not be a problem; [EGC 02-17] 
- return salvaged streambed surface material (or material of equivalent quality) to top 

layer of backfill. [EGC 02-11, EGC 03-2] Where granular material is encountered at the 
surface during excavation, cap the trench with 0.5 m of clean granular material; and 

- maintain or restore natural drainage and channel configurations. [EGC 02-2, EGC 03-2]. 
• Replace aquatic vegetation and organic debris removed from the construction area following 

trench backfilling. 
Trenchless Crossing Technique 
• Implement standard trenchless crossing measures (Details 6A-34 and 6A-35) where a 

trenchless crossing is planned (see Table 6.3). [EGC 02-2, EGC 02-11] Ensure inspection 
and contractor staff is familiar with the Directional Drilling Procedures and Instream Drilling 
Mud Release Contingency Plan (Appendix 6B) prior to commencement of trenchless 
crossing construction so that measures can be implemented quickly in the event of a drilling 
mud frac-out or crossing failure. 

• Same as above 



 

P
age 6-69 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
6.3 Increased water column 

suspended sediment 
concentrations 

All watercourse crossings Footprint to Local • Use the vehicle and pipeline crossing methods identified for each crossing (Table 6.3), which 
have been selected using data collected during field investigations and the public 
consultation program, as well as previous construction programs, to reduce sediment 
introduction based on waterbody sensitivity, streamflow and channel characteristics. [EGC 
01-5, EGC 02-2, EGC 02-11, EGC 02-12] 

• Install, where warranted, temporary diversion berms on approach slopes to watercourses 
and silt fences near the base of approach slopes to watercourses following grading. [EGC 
02-7, EGC 02-13, EGC 02-14, EGC 03-5] Repair damaged temporary erosion control 
structures before the end of each working day. 

• Schedule crossings of watercourses with moderate to high fish habitat potential during 
periods of low flow outside of the RAP (see Table 6.3). [EGC 01-3, EGC 02-11] 

• Postpone watercourse crossing construction if excessive flows or flood conditions exist or 
are anticipated, and construction methods cannot be modified to cope with the increased 
flow (see Flood and Excessive Flow Contingency Plan in Appendix 6B). [EGC 02-11] 

• Minimize clearing and ground disturbance within 16 m of the high water mark of all 
waterbodies to the degree practical. [EGC 02-4] 

• Adhere to instream construction windows and limit instream work period to less than one 
working day wherever practical. [EGC 01-3, EGC 02-11] 

• Place salvaged surface material above the high water mark in a manner that does not block 
drainage or runoff. [EGC 02-8] 

• Contour and stabilize banks and approach slopes and install temporary berms, silt fences, or 
cross ditches in any location where run-off from the right-of-way may flow into a watercourse. 
[EGC 02-13, EGC 02-14] 

• Seed with an approved native cover crop and seed mix prior to spring freshet wherever 
possible (Details 6A-46, 6A-49). [EGC 03-5] 

• Maintain or restore natural drainage and channel configurations. [EGC 02-2, EGC 03-2] 
• Isolate construction area where water is present in waterbodies with fish potential to reduce 

sediment input (see Table 6.3 for recommended crossing methods). [EGC 02-2] At these 
sites, implement measures outlined on Details 6A-31, 6A-32, 6A-33 and 6A-36 including the 
following:  
- ensure water from flumes, dam and pumps, diversions or other methods does not cause 

erosion or introduce sediment into the channel [EGC 02-8]; 
- construct a sump with berms, silt fences or straw bale filters to contain excavated 

instream spoil so that it does not re-enter the waterbody; [EGC 02-8] and 
- dewater the trench onto stable surfaces in a manner that does not cause erosion of 

soils, sedimentation of watercourses, or where icing will not be a problem. [EGC 02-17] 
• In fish bearing waterbodies, leave hard ditch plugs at least 3 m wide in place until the 

crossing has been initiated. [EGC 02-8] 
• In fish-bearing waterbodies, postpone clearing of slopes and banks until immediately prior to 

construction and leave a temporary uncleared buffer zone extending back from the crest of 
erosion prone slopes where practical. 

• Where earlier clearing is necessary, leave the vegetative ground mat and root structure 
intact. 

• Increase in suspended solid 
concentration during instream 
construction at trenched 
crossings within the zone-of-
influence will occur. 

• See also Water Quality and 
Quantity element 3.8 of this 
table. 



 

P
age 6-70 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
6.4 Blockage of fish movements All watercourse crossings Footprint to 

Region 
• Adhere to instream RAPs (Table 6.3 of the ESA) and limit instream work period to less than 

one working day wherever practical. [EGC 01-3, EGC 02-11] 
• Maintain 100% of downstream flow throughout instream activity period in fish-bearing 

waterbodies. 
• Install temporary single span bridges to allow vehicles to cross relatively narrow 

watercourses where sedimentation must be minimized or fish passage allowed (Detail 
6A-25) (see Table 6.3). 

• Blockage of fish movements 
may occur. 

6.5 Fish and bivalve mortality All watercourse crossings Footprint to 
Region 

• Adhere to instream RAPs (Table 6.3 of the ESA) and limit instream work period to less than 
one working day wherever possible. [EGC 01-3, EGC 02-11] 

• Salvage fish from isolated instream construction area and any bypass structures prior to 
dewatering and trenching at designated crossings.  

• Ensure pump intakes do not disturb the streambed and are screened with a maximum mesh 
size of 2.54 mm and approach velocity of 0.038 m/s. 

• Restrict water removal for hydrostatic testing to less than 5% of volume at designated 
waterbodies unless otherwise approved by the appropriate authority.  

• Implement applicable measures from the Fish and Bivalve Species of Concern Discovery 
Contingency Plan (Appendix 6B) should fish or bivalve species of concern be discovered 
during additional studies in 2007. 

• Do not permit construction personnel to fish on the worksite. 

• Increased fish and bivalve 
mortality due to suspended 
solids may occur.  

6.6 Interbasin transfer of aquatic 
organisms 

All watercourse crossings Footprint to 
Region 

• Return test water to its source watershed to prevent inter-basin transfer of aquatic 
organisms. [EGC 02-18] 

• No residual effect identified. 

6.7 Contamination from spills 
during construction and 
operations 

All watercourse crossings Footprint to Local • Design pipeline, including valve locations, to minimize operational spill risk and volume that 
could reach waterbodies. 

• Adhere to Spill Contingency procedures included in Appendix 6B to avoid contaminant 
introduction to waterbodies during construction. These include the following: 
- do not dispose of petroleum products or waste into waterways or on the ground. Prepare 

contingency plans for fuel and hazardous waste spills and ensure that all fuel and 
service vehicles carry a spill kit; 

- ensure that all hazardous material storage and oil changes, refuelling, washing and 
lubrication of industrial equipment occurs more than 100 m from a waterbody except 
where secondary containment is provided [EGC 02-2]; and 

- use vegetable-based hydraulic oils in hydraulic systems working near watercourses, if 
practical. Inspect hydraulic, fuel and lubrication systems to ensure they are in good 
condition and free of leaks. [EGC 02-2] 

• Contamination from spills 
during construction and 
operations may occur.  

• See Accidents and 
Malfunctions element 18.1 of 
this table. 

6.8 Loss or alteration of riparian 
habitat for fish and bivalve 
species of concern 

Watercourse crossings Footprint to Local • Fish population and aquatic habitat inventories were conducted at watercourse crossings 
along the route for CEP, Terrace Phases I and II, and in October 2006 along the Alberta 
Clipper pipeline route from KP 959.3 to KP 1245.2. [EGC 01-5] Although not captured during 
the field investigations, bigmouth buffalo (S3, Special Concern) is known to occur in the 
Qu'Appelle river (KP 657.1), chestnut lamprey (S3S4, Special Concern) is known to occur in 
the Souris River (KP 1073.4), and maple leaf mussel (Endangered) is known to occur in the 
Assiniboine River near the confluence with the Souris River (i.e., approx. 13 km downstream 
from the proposed Souris River crossing at KP 1073.4). Bigmouth buffalo has the potential to 
occur at the Qu'Appelle River crossing while both chestnut lamprey and maple leaf mussel 
have the potential to occur at the proposed Souris River crossing. 

• Potential fish and bivalve 
species of concern may be 
affected by increased 
suspended solid concentration 
and habitat alteration within 
the zone of influence at select 
watercourse crossings 



 

P
age 6-71 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
6.8 Loss or alteration of riparian 

habitat for fish and bivalve 
species of concern (cont’d) 

Same as above Same as above • An HDD method is recommended for both the Qu'Appelle River and Souris River crossings, 
if feasible, and unless otherwise approved by provincial and federal authorities. 

• Supplemental field studies may be required to determine the presence of fish and/or bivalve 
species of concern and critical aquatic habitat prior to construction (see Section 9.0 of the 
ESA).  

• In the event that bivalve species of concern are present in the vicinity of the Souris River, 
Oak Creek (KP 1109.3) and Deadhorse Creek crossings, implement contingency measures 
identified in Appendix 6B. 

• Implement one or more of the mitigative measures identified in Appendix 6B in the event that 
fish species of concern or critical habitat is discovered during either the supplemental field 
studies or during construction. [EGC 01-5] 

• Refer to Fish and Fish Habitat element 6.1 and 6.2 of this table for additional measures. 

• Same as above 

7. WETLANDS 
7.1 Potential alteration of habitat 

function (e.g., habitat for 
wildlife, amphibians, waterfowl 
and vegetation) 

Entire route Footprint • See Detail 6A-51 in Appendix 6A for more mitigative measures pertaining to wetland 
function. 

• During supplemental studies, follow measures in the Traffic Control Plan to minimize 
disturbance to wetlands (Appendix 6C). Restrict vehicle travel through wetland areas to one 
pass along the right-of-way where practical. 

• Adhere to all conditions of approvals, authorizations and permits for wetland crossings. [EGC 
02-11] 

• Follow measures in the Traffic Control Plan (Appendix 6C) to minimize disturbance to 
wetland areas during construction. 

• Schedule construction within wetlands during frozen ground conditions, if feasible. [EGC 01-
3] If construction occurs during nonfrozen conditions, attempt to schedule construction in 
wetlands during dry periods when water levels are low. [EGC 02-11] 

• Stake, flag or fence the right-of-way boundaries through all wetlands to prevent affecting the 
surrounding area. [EGC 02-3] 

• Install a shoo-fly around wetlands or construct a subsoil ramp if approved by appropriate 
regulatory authorities. Restrict access through wetlands to the shoofly or ramp to the extent 
practical. [EGC 02-2] Remove equipment crossing structures and restore to preconstruction 
contour during clean-up and restoration. [EGC 02-12] 

• Install swamp mats or geotextiles for heavy vehicle/equipment crossing wetlands during 
nonfrozen conditions. [EGC 02-8] Remove swamp mats or geotextiles immediately after 
construction activity at that location has been completed.  

• Use wide-track equipment or conventional equipment operated from swamp mats when 
working on saturated soils during nonfrozen conditions. 

• No activities are to occur within the migratory bird nesting period between April 1 to July 31, 
unless the area has been precleared or premowed or if no nests were observed during nest 
surveys conducted prior to clearing. See Wildlife and Wildlife Habitat element 9.2 of this 
table. 

• Minimize the removal of vegetation and the disturbance of soil adjacent to wetlands. [EGC 
02-4, EGC 02-11] 

• Salvage live trees or shrubs from banks of wetlands if requested by landowners. Store 
salvaged trees and shrubs on the side of the right-of-way in a manner such that they do not 
dry out before replanting during restoration (Detail 6A-2). [EGC 02-4] 

• Alteration of wetland habitat 
function will occur. 



 

P
age 6-72 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
7.1 Potential alteration of habitat 

function (e.g., habitat for 
wildlife, amphibians, waterfowl 
and vegetation) (cont’d) 

Same as above Same as above • Maintain low vegetation or vegetative ground mat within a 16 m buffer adjacent to wetlands 
to the extent practical by walking, storing and constructing over the undisturbed ground. 
[EGC 01-6, EGC 02-4] 

• Minimize the width of grubbing through wet areas during construction to facilitate the 
restoration of shrub communities. [EGC 02-4, EGC 02-11] 

• Restrict grading as much as practical. Conduct grading adjacent to wetlands away from the 
wetland to the extent practical to reduce the risk of sediment and other material entering the 
wetland. [EGC 02-7, EGC 02-11] Keep wetland soils separate from upland soils. [EGC 02-5] 

• Store excavated material in a manner that does not interfere with natural drainage patterns. 
[EGC 02-7] 

• Install berms, cross ditches and/or silt fences between wetlands and disturbed areas to 
prevent sedimentation of wetlands (Details 6A-23 and 6A-24). Ensure silt fences have been 
installed properly, are solid and filter fabric is tight. 

• Salvage surface material in unsaturated wetlands, giving extra attention to maintaining root 
stocks for replacement. Salvage surface material to a maximum depth of 40 cm, or to the 
depth of colour change where there is less than 40 cm of surface material, using the 
Environmental Alignment Sheets as a guide. 

• Do not dewater any permanent wetland. 
• Restore preconstruction profile in wetlands during reclamation. Remove any excess backfill 

to an upland location approved by the appropriate regulatory authorities. [EGC 03-2, EGC 
03-3] 

• Seed wetland with an appropriate wetland mix as indicated on the Environmental Alignment 
Sheets (Detail 6A-46).  

• Where shrubs are present prior to construction, use willow staking along the wetland to 
stabilize disturbances and reduce sedimentation risk to wetland (Detail 6A-38). [EGC 03-7] 

• See Wildlife and Wildlife Habitat element 9.1(c) and (d) of this table for measures pertaining 
to DU projects, Conservation Agreements (CAs) and NAWMP priority areas along the route. 

• Schedule maintenance activities during frozen conditions to the extent feasible. Follow above 
measures for work in wetlands during operations. 

Same as above 



 

P
age 6-73 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
7.2 Potential alteration of 

hydrologic function 
Entire route 
Houcher Lake and Provost South 
landscapes DU Project (KP 272.0 to 
KP 273.0) 
Cosine Lake Migratory Bird 
Concentration Site  
(KP 278.6 to KP 279.4) 
Chapleau Lakes Montmartre DU 
Project 
(KP 782.9 to KP 783.8) 
DU Wetland Projects 
(KP 784.5; 
KP 819.6 to KP 820.4; 
KP 928.1 to KP 930.9; 
KP 938.0 to KP 938.8) 
Game Bird Refuge 
(KP 985.0 to KP 990.0) 
Oak Lake/Plum Lakes Important Bird 
Area  
(KP 987.0 to KP 1004.0) 
Log Cabin DU Project 
(KP 1052.9 to KP 1053.7) 
Kozak and Rouire CA 
(NW 34-7-19 WPM) 
Cunningham CA 
(SW 36-7-19 WPM) 
Lizard Lake DU Project 
(KP 1174.3 to KP 1174.8) 
NAWMP priority areas 
(KP 959.8 to KP 977.0; 
KP 1052.0 to KP 1063.0) 

Footprint • See Detail 6A-51 in Appendix 6A for more mitigative measures pertaining to wetland 
function. 

• Implement the following mitigative measures appropriate for site- specific conditions as 
indicated in the Environmental Alignment Sheets. 
- Narrow down the proposed area of disturbance and protect the wetland by using 

fencing, clearly mark the wetland boundaries using flagging and limit traffic in the vicinity 
of the flagged area (Detail 6A-1). [EGC 02 3] 

- Minimize the width of grubbing through wet areas during construction to facilitate the 
restoration of shrub communities. 

- Leave an undisturbed organic mat as a buffer zone adjacent to large wetlands to limit 
the potential for sediment to enter wetlands, if practical. [EGC 01-6, EGC 02-4] 

- Install culverts, if warranted, to prevent grading or spoil from blocking natural drainage 
and causing ponding. [EGC 02-2] Follow measures listed under Water Quality and 
Quantity element 3.1 of this table. 

- Install temporary erosion control structures (e.g., silt fences and/or straw bales) within 
24 hours of backfilling the wetland crossing (Detail 6A-24). [EGC 02-7, EGC 02-11, EGC 
02-14] Ensure silt fences have been installed properly, are solid and filter fabric is tight. 

- Install trench breakers, where warranted, at the edge of perched wetlands to prevent the 
pipe trench from acting as a drain (Detail 6A-20). 

- Adhere to the following spill prevention measures: prohibit fuel storage, refuelling or 
servicing of equipment within 100 m of wetlands except where secondary containment is 
provided; and ensure equipment used for construction within the wetland is well 
maintained and free of fluid leaks. In the event of a spill, immediately implement 
measures to stop, control the migration of, and clean up the spilled substance as 
outlined in the Spill Contingency Plan in Appendix 6B (see also Accidents and 
Malfunctions element 18.1 of this table). [EGC 02-2] 

- Restore wetland to preconstruction profile during reclamation. Remove any excess 
backfill to an upland location approved by the appropriate regulatory authorities. [EGC 
03-2, EGC 03-3] 

- Do not dewater any permanent wetland. 
• Maintain water levels in all wetlands encountered within the game bird refuge and Oak 

Lake/Plum Lakes Important Bird Area (approximately KP 987.0 to KP 1004.0). Do not alter 
drainage or drain wetlands in this area unless otherwise requested/approved by provincial 
and federal authorities. Restore disturbed areas in wetlands to preconstruction profile during 
reclamation. Remove any excess backfill to an upland location approved by the appropriate 
regulatory authorities. [EGC 03-2, EGC 03-3] 

• Develop site-specific mitigative measures in consultation with the Manitoba Habitat Heritage 
Corporation and Canadian Wildlife Service to minimize impacts to CAs and NAWMP priority 
areas along the route. 

• Alteration of hydrologic 
function of wetlands during 
pipeline construction will 
occur. 

7.3 Potential loss or reduction of 
water quality function 

Entire route Footprint to Local • See Detail 6A-51 in Appendix 6A for more mitigative measures pertaining to wetland 
function. 

• Narrow down the proposed area of disturbance and protect the wetland by using fencing, 
clearly mark the wetland boundaries using flagging and limit traffic in the vicinity of the 
flagged area. [EGC 02-3] 

• Follow measures outlined for locations with high water table (see Water Quality and Quantity 
element 3.2 of this table). 

• Alteration of water quality 
function in wetlands during 
pipeline construction will 
occur. 



 

P
age 6-74 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
7.3 Potential loss or reduction of 

water quality function (cont’d) 
Same as above Same as above • Conduct grading adjacent to wetlands away from the wetland to the extent feasible to reduce 

the risk of sediment and other material entering the wetland. 
• Install berms, cross ditches and/or silt fences between wetlands and disturbed areas to 

prevent sedimentation (Details 6A-23 and 6A-24). Ensure silt fences have been installed 
properly, are solid and filter fabric is tight. 

• Inspect and maintain sediment barriers regularly (i.e., weekly or within 24 hours of 
substantial rainfall). Remove sediment barriers after the disturbed area is revegetated and 
the area is stable. [EGC 02-14] 

• Adhere to the following spill prevention measures: prohibit fuel storage, refuelling or servicing 
of equipment near wetlands except where secondary containment is provided; and ensure 
equipment used for construction within the wetland is well maintained and free of fluid leaks. 
In the event of a spill, immediately implement measures to stop, control the migration of, and 
clean up the spilled substance as outlined in the Spill Contingency Plan in Appendix 6B (see 
also Accidents and Malfunctions element 18.1 of this table).  

• Where shrubs are present prior to construction, use live plant staking (e.g., willows) along the 
wetland to stabilize disturbances and reduce sedimentation risk to wetland (Detail 6A-38). 
[EGC 03-7] 

• Same as above 

8. VEGETATION 
8.1 Loss or alteration of native 

vegetation 
Native prairie, bush/wooded areas, 
riparian areas and wetland areas 
See Tables 5.67 and 5.92 of the 
ESA for WHPA lands, PFRA lands 
and community pastures on Crown 
lands 

Footprint • The pipeline has been aligned to minimize the length and width of disturbance on areas 
supporting native vegetation.  

• Supplemental vegetation studies will be completed on lands along the route with native 
vegetation or bush areas that may support species of special conservation status prior to 
construction (see Section 9.0 of the ESA). 

• During supplemental field studies, follow measures in the Traffic Control Plan to minimize 
disturbance to native vegetation (Appendix 6C). Attempt to travel through areas of high 
sensitivity (e.g. native prairie) on foot. Restrict vehicle travel through native prairie and 
riparian areas to one pass along the right-of-way where practical. 

• Do not clear timber, stumps, brush and other vegetation beyond marked right-of-way 
boundaries. [EGC 02-4]  

• Ensure lands with native vegetation are seeded with a native seed mix. Avoid the use of 
highly invasive species on adjacent non-native lands. Use a native seed mix on roadside 
ditches adjacent to lands supporting native vegetation (Details 6A-46 to 6A-49). 

• Alteration of approximately 
390 ha of native vegetation, 
including 220 ha of native 
prairie. 

8.2 Loss of vascular plant species 
of concern or significant 
vascular plant communities 

Native prairie, bush/wooded areas, 
riparian areas and wetland areas 
See Tables 5.67 and 5.92 of the 
ESA for WHPA lands, PFRA lands 
and community pastures on Crown 
lands 
See Appendix 5D of the ESA 

Footprint • The proposed pipeline has been aligned to follow existing disturbances as much as possible 
and the right-of-way width kept to a minimum to minimize loss of potential habitat. 

• Avoid the sand-nut grass enclosure located on the north side of the existing Enbridge 
pipeline corridor from KP 196.7 to KP 197.8 (CNT 990025) by constructing the proposed 
pipeline adjacent to the south side of the corridor. 

• Additional field studies will be completed in the spring and summer of 2007 along segments 
of the route supporting native vegetation along major watercourse valleys and where unique 
features are encountered to identify locations of plant species or communities of concern 
(see Section 9.0 of the ESA). [EGC 01-5]  

• Implement one or more of the mitigative measures identified in Appendix 6B in the event of a 
discovery of vascular plant species of concern or rare plant communities of concern. [EGC 
02-2] 

• If mitigative measures do not 
completely protect the site, 
some loss or alteration of the 
local population may occur. 

• Transplanted or propagated 
specimens may not survive. 

• If the community cannot be 
avoided, then a narrow strip of 
the community will be 
disturbed resulting in some 
loss or alteration of the 
community. 



 

P
age 6-75 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
8.3 Alteration of vegetation important to wildlife    
8.3(a) general Native prairie, bush/wooded areas, 

bush-pasture, pasture, riparian areas 
and wetland areas  
See Tables 5.67 and 5.92 of the 
ESA for WHPA lands, PFRA lands 
and community pastures on Crown 
lands 

Footprint • The pipeline has been aligned to minimize the length and width of disturbance on areas 
supporting vegetation important to wildlife.  

• Supplemental vegetation studies will be completed on lands along the route with native 
vegetation that may support species of special conservation status prior to construction (see 
Section 9.0 of the ESA). 

• Avoid or minimize the loss of important site-specific habitat by narrowing down the 
construction right-of-way through vegetation associations or habitat important for wildlife and 
implement measures from the Plant Species of Concern Discovery Contingency Plan 
(Appendix 6B), in conjunction with appropriate topsoil stripping procedures and seeding with 
suitable native seed mixes. [EGC 03-4] 

• Protect trees or shrubs adjacent to the right-of-way that are identified as being important to 
wildlife to prevent damage during construction. Protection measures include flagging, 
fencing, signing and/or covering roots within the dripline with a minimum of 75 cm of topsoil. 
[EGC 02-4] 

• Implement other reclamation techniques, such as natural recovery and seed bank salvage, if 
warranted, to restore ecological diversity and wildlife habitat capability as well as preserve 
rare or unique vegetation elements important to wildlife (Detail 6A-4). 

• Alteration of approximately 
607 ha of vegetation important 
to wildlife. 

8.3(b) loss of thorny buffaloberry and 
other important shrubs/trees 

KP 243.8 
KP 500.3 
KP 506.9 
KP 517.2 
KP 559.7 
KP 564.6 

Footprint • Narrow down the construction right-of-way and temporary work space to preserve thorny 
buffaloberry and other important shrubs/trees (Detail 6A-1). 

• No residual effect identified. 

8.4 Revegetation of disturbed areas Entire route Footprint • It is the responsibility of the landowner or occupant to seed and fertilize cultivated land 
segments of the right-of-way as part of their normal farming operations. Cultivated land refers 
to lands that are under annual crop or fallow at the time of construction. 

• Seed mixes have been developed for the Alberta Clipper pipeline route in consideration of 
site-specific environmental factors including steep slopes, riparian areas, native prairie and 
bush/wooded areas, and soil and moisture conditions (Details 6A-46 to 6A-49). [EGC 03-4] 

• Seed noncultivated disturbed areas as indicated on the Environmental Alignment Sheets as 
soon as weather and soil conditions permit following final clean-up [EGC 03-4].  

• Follow reclamation measures outlined in Detail 6A-50 pertaining to sandy soils, including 
those soils within the Sounding Dunes, Elbow PFRA Community Pasture, Oak Lake Sand 
Hills and Souris Sand Hills. 

• Seed PFRA and community grazing co-op lands with the seed mix identified on the 
Environmental Alignment Sheets and in the PFRA Environmental Assessment Plans (see 
Appendix V of the ESA) unless otherwise requested by the pasture manager. 

• Implement appropriate reclamation measures as indicated on the Environmental Alignment 
Sheets to address site-specific conditions that may result in problems revegetating disturbed 
areas (e.g., chipping slash and spreading over areas with very sandy soils; straw crimping on 
areas with high wind erosion potential or are otherwise difficult to revegetate; installation of 
diversion berms and ditches on slopes) (Details 6A-5, 6A-23 and 6A-45). [EGC 02-4, EGC 
03-4] 

• Follow mitigative measures outlined in the Detailed Crossing Construction Plan for the South 
Saskatchewan River Valley to be undertaken by Enbridge prior to construction (see 
Section 9.0 of the ESA). 

• Revegetation of some 
disturbed soils with high wind 
erosion potential may be 
difficult. See Soil Capability 
element 2.3(b) of this table. 

• Revegetation of soils within 
the Sounding Dunes, Elbow 
PFRA Community Pasture, 
Oak Lake Sand Hills and 
Souris Sand Hills may be 
difficult. See Soil Capability 
element 2.8 of this table. 

• Revegetation of soils saline to 
the surface may be difficult. 
See Soil Capability element 
2.1(c) of this table. 



 

P
age 6-76 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
8.4 Revegetation of disturbed areas 

(cont’d) 
Same as above Same as above • Restrict vehicle access over newly seeded areas. [EGC 03-4] 

• Monitor the effectiveness of revegetation efforts during post-construction monitoring of the 
right-of-way. Inspect moderate and steep slopes as well as areas with problem soils. Control 
weeds and reseed noncultivated lands until new vegetation is self-sustaining. Undertake 
additional remedial work where warranted. 

• Same as above 

8.5 Weed introduction     
8.5(a) general Entire route Footprint to Local • A preconstruction weed survey will be completed along the route to identify noxious weed 

infestations (see Section 9.0 of the ESA). Contractors and Inspectors will be provided with 
information to help identify noxious weeds as part of the Environmental Training Program 
(see Section 8.0 of the ESA). [EGC 02-2] 

• Follow weed mitigation measures outlined in Detail 6A-6. 
• Flag areas identified as having noxious weed infestations prior to commencement of site 

preparation (i.e., clearing, grading, topsoil stripping) activities. Remove noxious weed 
infestations (pick and remove to approved landfill location, or destroy with weed burners or 
herbicides) prior to commencement of right-of-way preparation activities. [EGC 02-2] 

• Clean all construction equipment prior to its arrival on site in order to minimize the spread of 
weeds. [EGC 02-2] 

• Minimize the construction equipment used and limit the number of passes equipment makes 
through weed infested areas. [EGC 02-2]  

• Place construction or swamp mats over infested areas to minimize construction equipment 
transporting weed or plant material, if practical. Where mats are used, ensure they are free of 
soil, vegetation and debris prior to removing from the site. [EGC 02-2] 

• Strip topsoil from the full right-of-way where localized weed infestation are encountered (use 
Environmental Alignment Sheets and Figure 6A-1 in Appendix 6A as guides) and contain the 
spoil pile containing noxious weeds to prevent mixing with the surrounding soil during 
regrading and final clean-up. [EGC 02-2]  

• Monitor topsoil piles for weed growth during the course of construction and implement 
corrective measures (e.g., spraying) if warranted. 

• Clean equipment involved in clearing or topsoil handling activities in locations identified as 
having noxious weed infestations prior to moving to the next land parcel. Do not allow soil or 
water from cleaning equipment to flow to uninfested areas. [EGC 02-2]  

• Ensure straw and seed mixes used to revegetate disturbed areas are free of noxious weed 
seed. Use Certified Canada No. 1 or best available seed and retain the analysis certificate 
(Details 6A-45, 6A-46 and 6A-49). [EGC 03-4] 

• Record any sites where equipment was specifically cleaned due to concerns associated with 
weeds and monitor during the following growing season. Control growth of weeds as 
warranted (Detail 6A-6). 

• Weed introduction and spread 
may occur. 

8.5(b) registered seed growers Locations identified during Terrace 
Phase I:  
KP 452.5 
KP 819.8 to KP 822.2 
KP 895.2 

Footprint to Local • Steam clean soils handling equipment prior to entry at these locations upon request of the 
landowner to minimize weed concerns regarding certified seed. 

• Strip the full right-of-way at the request of the landowner. 

• Weed introduction and spread 
may occur. 

8.6 Removal of ornamental trees, 
windbreaks or shelterbelts 

Entire route Footprint • Save ornamental trees, wind breaks or shelterbelts to the extent practical if requested by the 
landowner (Detail 6A-2). [EGC 02-4] 

• Consider boring underneath these trees or replace them by transplanting with a tree spade if 
practical. [EGC 02-4] 

• Ornamental trees, windbreaks 
or shelterbelts may be 
removed as a result of 
construction activities. 



 

P
age 6-77 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
8.6 Removal of ornamental trees, 

windbreaks or shelterbelts 
(cont’d) 

Same as above Same as above • Narrow down the right-of-way if requested by the landowner and if practical (Detail 6A-1). 
• Protect ornamental or other important trees adjacent to the right-of-way from damage with 

flags, fencing, or signs, and if appropriate, by placing a minimum of 75 cm of topsoil covering 
the roots (Detail 6A-1). [EGC 02-4] 

• Same as above 

8.7 Loss of salvageable timber Bush/wooded areas Footprint • Salvage and deck timber on privately owned lands where requested by the landowner. [EGC 
02-4] 

• Do not bulldoze salvageable timber. If the owner of the timber rights does not want cleared 
timber, offer the timber to a commercial buyer. If a willing commercial buyer cannot be found, 
consider the timber nonmerchantable and dispose of it accordingly. [EGC 02-4]. 

• No residual effect identified. 

9. WILDLIFE AND WILDLIFE HABITAT 
9.1 Loss or alteration of habitat     
9.1(a) general Native prairie, bush/wooded, bush-

pasture, pasture, shelterbelts 
Entire route • The pipeline has been aligned to minimize the length and width of disturbance on areas 

supporting vegetation important to wildlife. 
• Wildlife habitat field studies were conducted along selected segments of the route from 

KP 959.3 to KP 1245.2 in October 2006. Conduct additional wildlife studies in spring/early 
summer 2007 on segments of the Alberta Clipper route supporting native vegetation or 
pasture lands greater than 500 m in length to identify site-specific features associated with 
sensitive wildlife species in the vicinity of the Alberta Clipper pipeline route (see Section 9.0 
of the ESA).  

• During supplemental field studies, follow measures in the Traffic Control Plan to minimize 
disturbance to native vegetation (Appendix 6C). Attempt to travel through areas of high 
sensitivity (e.g. native prairie) on foot. Restrict vehicle travel through native prairie and 
riparian areas to one pass along the right-of-way where practical. Avoid travel through 
wetlands. 

• If a tree to be cleared contains an active bird nest, or if a ground nest, burrow or den is 
discovered during clearing, suspend the work activity, fence or flag off the area, and contact 
the Environmental Inspector (see Wildlife and Wildlife Habitat element 9.1(b) of this table). 
[EGC 02-4] Implement the Wildlife Species of Concern Discovery Contingency Plan 
(Appendix 6B). 

• Notify the provincial Wildlife Biologists if construction will damage beaver ponds, dams and 
lodges, muskrat push-ups or other aquatic furbearer habitats, raptor nests, mineral licks or 
other evidence of special wildlife use in the area. [EGC 01-2] 

• Narrow down the construction right-of-way and temporary work space where nest sites or 
other critical site-specific habitats are encountered by the route to avoid habitat loss 
(Detail 6A-1). 

• At locations where narrowing down is not practical and the potential for loss of important 
habitat exists, implement measures to restore the lost habitat (e.g., transplanting or planting 
of important shrubs, installing artificial nest boxes and platforms). [EGC 02-2] 

• Obtain approval from the applicable regulatory authority prior to beaver dam removal. 
• Restore preconstruction profile in wetlands during reclamation.  
• Reconstruct earthen islands, if encountered in wetlands. 
• Leave breaks in the trench crown at obvious drainages and wherever seepage occurs to 

minimize interference with natural drainage. 
• Remove ramps and other vehicle crossing structures following construction in wetlands or 

sloughs with the potential for waterfowl production. 

• Alteration of approximately 
607 ha of potential wildlife 
habitat. 



 

P
age 6-78 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
9.1(a) general (cont'd) Same as above Same as above • Revegetate disturbed noncultivated portions of the right-of-way along segments of the route 

with the appropriate native or agronomic seed mix as outlined in Detail 6A-46 and on the 
Environmental Alignment Sheets. 

• Follow mitigative measures outlined in the Detailed Crossing Construction Plan for the South 
Saskatchewan River Valley to be undertaken by Enbridge prior to construction (see 
Section 9.0 of the ESA). 

• Allow low-growing shrubs to re-establish along the right-of-way. 

Same as above 

9.1(b) disturbance of migratory bird 
nests 

Noncultivated lands Footprint • No vegetation clearing or other construction activities involving heavy equipment are to occur 
within the migratory bird nesting period from April 1 to July 31. Construction activities may 
proceed within the nesting period where the area has been precleared or premowed prior to 
April 1 or with approval of Environment Canada. 

• In areas where preclearing/premowing activities have not been completed prior to April 1, a 
breeding bird survey will be undertaken by a qualified avian biologist prior to initiating the 
above noted activities within the migratory bird nesting period on segments of the route 
supporting native vegetation or pasture lands 500 m in length or greater, along valley slopes 
and at unique features. Environment Canada will review the proposed survey methods and 
results, and in the event that a nest is discovered, be consulted in the development of 
mitigation strategies. If adequate mitigative measures are not available, work in proximity to 
an active nest will be postponed until the nest is no longer active. 

• No residual effect identified. 

9.1(c) disturbance of DU projects Farkas Project #3216 (approximately 
500 m downstream of the Eyehill 
Creek crossing at KP 272.2) 
Houcher Lake and Provost South 
landscapes 
(KP 272.0 to KP 273.0) 
Chapleau Lakes Montmartre 
(KP 782.9 to KP 783.8) 
Wetland Projects at: 
KP 784.5 
KP 819.6 to KP 820.4 
KP 928.1 to KP 930.9 
KP 938.0 to KP 938.8 
Log Cabin 
(KP 1052.9 to KP 1053.7) 
Lizard Lake 
(KP 1174.3 to KP 1174.8) 

Footprint • No vegetation clearing or other construction activities involving heavy equipment are to occur 
within the migratory bird nesting period from April 1 to July 31.  

• Avoid disturbing constructed works (e.g., dikes, ditches, dams, control structures, etc.) in 
wetlands maintained by DU.  

• Restore preconstruction profile in wetlands during reclamation.  
• Use pipeline and equipment crossing methods at Eyehill Creek that minimize sedimentation 

to avoid impacting the Farkas Project downstream of the crossing (see Table 6.3 of the 
ESA). 

• See additional measures in Wetlands element 7.1 and 7.2 of this table. 

• Alteration of habitat within DU 
project areas. 

• See Wildlife and Wildlife 
Habitat element 9.1(a) of this 
table. 

9.1(d) disturbance of CAs and 
NAWMP priority areas 

Kozak and Rouire CA 
(NW 34-7-19 WPM) 
Cunningham CA 
(SW 36-7-19 WPM) 
NAWMP priority areas 
(KP 959.8 to KP 977; 
KP 1052.0 to KP 1063.0) 

Footprint • No vegetation clearing or other construction activities involving heavy equipment are to occur 
within the migratory bird nesting period from April 1 to July 31.  

• Develop site-specific mitigative measures in consultation with the Manitoba Habitat Heritage 
Corporation to minimize impacts to CAs along the route.  

• Develop site-specific mitigative measures in consultation with the Manitoba Habitat Heritage 
Corporation and Canadian Wildlife Service to minimize impacts to NAWMP priority areas 
along the route. 

• Restore preconstruction profile in wetlands during reclamation. See additional measures in 
Wetlands element 7.1 and 7.2 of this table. 

• Alteration of habitat within CAs 
and NAWMP priority areas. 

• See Wildlife and Wildlife 
Habitat element 9.1(a) of this 
table. 



 

P
age 6-79 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
9.1(e) disturbance of PFRA 

Community Pastures, Kendal 
Game Preserve lands, WHPA 
lands, and Fish and Wildlife 
Development Fund areas  

See Tables 5.67 and 5.92 of the 
ESA 

Footprint • Conduct wildlife studies in spring/early summer 2007 on segments of the Alberta Clipper 
route supporting native vegetation or pasture lands greater than 500 m in length to identify 
site-specific features associated with sensitive wildlife species in the vicinity of the Alberta 
Clipper pipeline route (see Section 9.0 of the ESA).  

• No vegetation clearing or other construction activities involving heavy equipment are to occur 
within the migratory bird nesting period from April 1 to July 31.  

• Adhere to restrictions on construction activities for identified sensitive wildlife species 
(Table 6.4) where the Kendal Game Preserve, WHPA lands and Fish and Wildlife 
Development Fund areas are encountered, unless otherwise approved by SENV Wildlife 
Biologists and federal wildlife authorities. 

• Develop site-specific mitigative measures in consultation with PFRA authorities to minimize 
impacts to wildlife habitat in community pastures along the route. 

• Alteration of habitat within 
PFRA community pastures, 
Kendal Game Preserve, 
WHPA lands, and Fish and 
Wildlife Development Fund 
areas. 

• See Wildlife and Wildlife 
Habitat element 9.1(a) of this 
table. 

9.2 Sensory disturbance of wildlife     
9.2(a) general Entire route Footprint to Local • Conduct additional wildlife studies in spring/early summer 2007 on segments of the route 

supporting native vegetation or pasture lands greater than 500 m in length to identify site-
specific features associated with sensitive wildlife species in the vicinity of the Alberta Clipper 
pipeline route (see Section 9.0 of the ESA).  

• Adhere to restrictions on construction activities for identified sensitive wildlife species as 
outlined in Table 6.4 unless otherwise approved by provincial and federal wildlife authorities. 

• Prohibit construction personnel from harming, harassing or feeding wildlife or livestock. Do 
not allow pets, firearms or recreational use of all-terrain vehicles or snowmobiles on the right-
of-way. [EGC 02-2] 

• Educate the workforce by means of compulsory orientations, which will include 
environmental requirements, prior to starting work on the site. 

• Work expeditiously to maintain a tight construction spread (i.e., limit interval between front 
end work activities such as grading and back end activities such as clean-up) to minimize 
potential barriers and hazards to wildlife. 

• Displacement of wildlife away 
from the right-of-way during 
construction with resultant use 
of potentially suboptimal 
habitat during noncritical 
periods. 



 

P
age 6-80 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
9.2(b) disturbance to migratory birds 

and waterfowl 
Entire route 
Houcher Lake and Provost South 
landscapes DU Project (KP 272.0 to 
KP 273.0) 
Cosine Lake Migratory Bird 
Concentration Site  
(KP 278.6 to KP 279.4) 
Chapleau Lakes Montmartre DU 
Project 
(KP 782.9 to KP 783.8) 
Kendal Game Preserve 
(KP 781.9 to KP 784.6) 
DU Wetland Projects 
(KP 784.5; 
KP 819.6 to KP 820.4; 
KP 928.1 to KP 930.9; 
KP 938 to KP 938.8) 
Game Bird Refuge 
(KP 985.0 to KP 990.0) 
Oak Lake/Plum Lakes Important Bird 
Area  
(KP 987.0 to KP 1004.0) 
Log Cabin DU Project 
(KP 1052.9 to KP 1053.7) 
Kozak and Rouire CA 
(NW 34-7-19 WPM) 
Cunningham CA 
(SW 36-7-19 WPM) 
Lizard Lake DU Project 
(KP 1174.3 to KP 1174.8) 
NAWMP priority areas 
(KP 959.8 to KP 977.0; 
KP 1052.0 to KP 1063.0) 
Sandhill crane staging area 
(KP 297.0 to KP 298.4) 
See Tables 5.67 and 5.92 of the 
ESA for locations of WHPA lands 
encountered by the route. 
See Tables 5.66, 5.71, 5.74 and 5.75 
of the ESA for additional locations of 
nesting migratory birds observed 
during CEP, Terrace Phases I and II. 

Footprint to Local • Avoid construction within the April 1 to July 31 peak nesting period along segments of the 
route that traverse lands associated with bird use (i.e., refuges, DU projects, CAs, NAWMP 
priority areas, WHPA lands) as well as large wetlands (Table 6.5 of the ESA) or areas with a 
high density of small potholes with habitat suitable for waterfowl production, unless otherwise 
approved by provincial and federal wildlife authorities.  

• If construction cannot be completed outside of April 1 to July 31, preclear and premow the 
right-of-way prior to April 1 to discourage nesting. If preclearing and premowing are not 
practical, complete a nesting bird survey prior to construction to identify nest locations along 
the right-of-way. Postpone construction activities in the vicinity of nest locations on the right-
of-way until nestlings have fledged. 

• For Cosine Lake Migratory Bird Concentration Site, maintain a 250 m buffer from the 
perimeter of the water body, portion thereof or nesting colony for low, medium and high 
intensity activities during periods of peak use (i.e., from May 1 to October 15).  

• Avoid construction along the sandhill crane staging area (KP 297.0 to KP 298.4) when birds 
are congregated on wetland and fields adjacent to the route in spring and fall. 

• See additional measures in Wildlife and Wildlife Habitat element 9.2(a) of this table. 

• Displacement of wildlife away 
from the Alberta Clipper 
pipeline area during 
construction with resultant use 
of potentially suboptimal 
habitat during noncritical 
periods. 



 

P
age 6-81 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
9.2(c) disturbance of sharp-tailed 

grouse 
Wildlife Key Area: 
KP 212.4 to KP 213.4 
KP 225.1 to KP 225.6 
KP 226.5 to KP 227.5 
Leks noted during Enbridge CEP, 
Terrace Phases I and II: 
KP 324.6 to KP 332.2 
KP 328.1 to KP 336.8 
KP 505.0 to KP 507.1 
KP 507.9 
KP 511.3 to KP 511.6 
KP 560.4 
KP 566.0 to KP 567.5 
KP 597.0 
KP 627.5  
KP 648.9 to KP 649.5 
KP 662.5 to KP 664.0 
KP 663.3 
KP 782.0 
KP 908.2 
Critical Habitat: 
KP 324.8 to KP 326.0 
KP 328.2 to KP 331.3 
KP 331.5 to KP 333.1 
KP 506.0 to KP 507.2 
KP 507.5 to KP 508.3 
KP 511.3 to KP 512.2 
KP 563.3 to KP 567.3 
KP 566.0 to KP 567.6 
KP 586.3 to KP 587.5 
KP 662.5 to KP 664.0 
KP 781.7 to KP 784.2 
KP 906.9 to KP 909.4 
KP 940.1 to KP 945.0 

Footprint to Local • In Alberta, a year round RAP exists within 500 m of a lek (Table 6.4 of the ESA). Should any 
leks be identified within 500 m of the proposed route during supplemental surveys, consult 
with provincial wildlife authorities to determine appropriate mitigative measures.  

• In Saskatchewan, schedule construction within 400 m of a lek to avoid sensitive spring use 
period of dancing grounds (March 15 to May 15) unless otherwise approved by provincial 
and federal wildlife authorities. 

• See additional measures in Wildlife and Wildlife Habitat element 9.2(a) of this table. 

• Displacement of sharp-tailed 
grouse from lek sites or 
nesting grounds near the 
Alberta Clipper pipeline route 
during construction with 
resultant use of potentially 
suboptimal habitat during 
noncritical periods. 

9.2(c) disturbance of ungulates  KP 176.0 to KP 185.6 
KP 218.7 to KP 230.0  

Footprint to Local • A winter RAP from January to March may apply to ungulate habitat along the proposed route 
in Alberta depending on the severity of winter conditions. Consult with provincial wildlife 
authorities to determine appropriate mitigative measures. 

• Displacement of ungulates 
near the Alberta Clipper 
pipeline route during winter 
construction with resultant use 
of potentially suboptimal 
habitat during noncritical 
periods. 

9.3 Direct and indirect mortality Entire route Footprint to 
Region 

• Conduct additional wildlife studies in spring/early summer 2007 on segments of the route 
supporting native vegetation or pasture lands greater than 500 m in length to identify site-
specific features associated with sensitive wildlife species in the vicinity of the Alberta Clipper 
pipeline (see Section 9.0 of the ESA).  

• Establish construction traffic speed limits and post speed limits on access roads to reduce 
the risk of collisions with wildlife (see Traffic Control Plan, Appendix 6C). 

• Minimize construction vehicles traveling to and from worksite (e.g., use multi-passenger 
vehicles to transport workers). 

• Potential for vehicle/wildlife 
collisions on access roads and 
along the right-of-way during 
construction. 

• Potential for mortality due to 
the physical disturbance of 
undiscovered nests, burrows, 
dens or other localized habitat 
on the right-of-way. 



 

P
age 6-82 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
9.3 Direct and indirect mortality 

(cont’d) 
Same as above Same as above • Report any incidents or collisions with wildlife to the Environmental Inspector, who will notify 

local wildlife authorities and the police as appropriate (see Wildlife Encounter Contingency 
Plan in Appendix 6B). [EGC 02-2] 

• Remove trapped animals from the trench at the start of each day before conducting 
construction activities that may have the potential to harm an animal in the trench.  

• Remove shrub and tree vegetation, and mow grass from construction right-of-way prior to the 
nesting season (i.e., before April 1) to discourage nesting along the right-of-way. 

• Collect construction garbage daily and dispose of in approved locations to prevent attracting 
nuisance wildlife. Do not dispose of waste in the trench. [EGC 02-2] Report scavenging or 
dangerous wildlife along with the location and details to regional wildlife authorities and, if 
appropriate, the local police department. 

• Same as above 

9.4 Blockage of antelope 
movement during operations 

KP 268.7 to KPR 12 Footprint to Local • If approved by the landowner, string the bottom fence wire at these locations no less than 
40 cm above the ground to permit antelope passage. Elsewhere, string bottom wire at same 
elevation as adjacent fencing. 

• No residual effect identified. 

10. SPECIES AT RISK 
10.1 Loss or alteration of riparian 

habitat for fish species at risk 
Watercourse crossings Footprint to Local • Fish population and aquatic habitat inventories were conducted at watercourse crossings 

along the route for CEP, Terrace Phases I and II, and in October 2006 along the Alberta 
Clipper pipeline route from KP 959.3 to KP 1245.2. [EGC 01-5] No fish species at risk have 
been found in watercourses along the pipeline route during past surveys.  

• Supplemental field studies may be required to determine the presence of fish species at risk 
and critical aquatic habitat prior to construction (see Section 9.0 of the ESA). In the event 
that fish species at risk are identified during supplemental field work, implement contingency 
measures identified in Appendix 6B. 

• Potential fish species at risk 
may be affected by increased 
suspended solid concentration 
and habitat alteration within 
the zone of influence at select 
watercourse crossings. 

10.2 Loss or alteration of vascular 
plant species at risk  

Native vegetation area Footprint • The proposed pipeline has been aligned to follow existing disturbances as much as possible 
and the right-of-way width kept to a minimum to minimize loss of potential habitat. 

• No vascular plant species at risk have been identified along the proposed route during past 
vegetation surveys for CEP, Terrace Phases I and II. 

• Additional field studies will be completed in the spring and summer of 2007 along segments 
of the route supporting native vegetation along major watercourse valleys and where unique 
features are encountered to identify locations of vascular plant species at risk (see 
Section 9.0 of the ESA). [EGC 01-5]  

• Implement one or more of the mitigative measures identified in Appendix 6B in the event of a 
discovery of a plant species at risk. [EGC 02-2] 

• If mitigative measures do not 
completely protect the site, 
some loss or alteration of the 
local plant species at risk 
population may occur. 

10.3 Wildlife Species at Risk     
10.3(a) loss or alteration of site-

specific habitat used by 
wildlife species at risk 

Native prairie, bush/wooded, bush-
pasture, pasture, shelterbelts 

Footprint to Local • The proposed pipeline has been aligned to follow existing disturbances as much as possible 
and the right-of-way width kept to a minimum to minimize loss of potential habitat. 

• Abide by construction timing and setback constraints applied to sensitive habitats for species 
with special conservation status (Table 6.4) unless otherwise approved by provincial and 
federal wildlife authorities. [EGC 01-3] 

• Field studies were completed prior construction of CEP, Terrace Phases I and II along the 
Alberta Clipper route and in select locations in October 2006 from KP 959.3 to KP 1245.2. 

• Refer to mitigative measures presented under Wildlife and Wildlife Habitat element 9.1(a) of 
this table. 

• Alteration of potential habitat 
supporting wildlife species at 
risk. 

• See Wildlife and Wildlife 
Habitat element 9.1 of this 
table. 



 

P
age 6-83 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
10.3(a) loss or alteration of site-

specific habitat used by 
wildlife species at risk (cont’d) 

Same as above Same as above • Supplemental field studies will be completed in spring 2007 and, where warranted, prior to 
construction to determine the presence of any habitat use by species at risk. These studies 
will also verify whether the habitat features used by species at risk during the previous field 
investigations are currently providing habitat to species at risk (see Section 9.0 of the ESA). 
[EGC 01-5] 

• Narrow down and fence off the construction right-of-way and temporary work space to 
preserve thorny buffaloberry, willows or other shrubby habitat where loggerhead shrike 
nesting habitat is observed (Detail 6A-1). 

• Transplant willow or thorny buffaloberry shrubs that provide loggerhead shrike habitat, if they 
cannot be avoided by narrowing down and fencing off the construction right-of-way and 
temporary work space, as much as feasible. 

• Implement one or more of the mitigative measures identified in Appendix 6B in the event that 
a wildlife species of concern or critical habitat is discovered during either supplemental field 
studies or construction. [EGC 01-5] 

• Same as above 

10.3(b) auditory or visual disturbances 
of wildlife species at risk 

Entire route 
KP 213.1 to KP 215.0 [LOSH]2 
KP 235.6 to KP 236.9 [LOSH]2 
KP 243.7 to KP 244.6 [LOSH]2 
KP 293.7 [LOSH]2 
KP 324.7 (20 m S) [BUOW]2 
KP 325.2 (400 m S) [BUOW]2 
KP 345.3 (<500 m) [BUOW]2 
KP 383.3 (50 m S) [LOSH]2 
KP 385.0 (<500 m) [BUOW]2 
KP 390.3 [LOSH]2 
KP 390.5 [LOSH]2 
KP 411.1 (<500 m) [BUOW]2 
KP 427.0 [BUOW]2 
KP 428.0 (< 500 m) [BUOW]2 
KP 431.2 (<500 m) [BUOW]2 
KP 438.7 (460 m NE) [BUOW]2 
KP 441.8 (410 m NE) [BUOW]2 
KP 493.3 (<500 m) [BUOW]2 
KP 553.1 to KP 553.7 [LOSH]2 
KP 568.7 (<500 m) [BUOW]2 
KP 605.7 to KP 606.1 [LOSH]2 
KP 612.8 (>200 m S) [LOSH]2 
KP 621.8 (15 m S) [LOSH]2 
KP 626.4 (225 m S) [LOSH]2 
KPR 4.4 (<500 m) [BUOW]2 
KPR 15.0 (<500 m) [BUOW]2 
KPR 19.5 (<500 m) [BUOW]2 
KP 1131.6 (<50 m) [NLFR]2  
KP 1196.6 (75 m S) [NLFR]2  
See Table 5.72 for BUOW2 nest 
boxes installed near the route during 
the Enbridge CEP. 

Footprint to Local • Abide by construction timing and setback constraints applied to sensitive habitats for species 
with special conservation status (Table 6.4) unless otherwise approved by provincial and 
federal wildlife authorities. [EGC 01-3] 

• Supplemental field studies will be completed in spring 2007 and, where warranted, prior to 
construction to determine the presence of species at risk within 500 m of the pipeline route 
(see Section 9.0 of the ESA).  

• Implement one or more of the mitigative measures identified in Appendix 6B in the event that 
a wildlife species of concern or critical habitat is discovered during either supplemental field 
studies or construction. [EGC 01-5] 

• Refer to mitigative measures presented under Wildlife and Wildlife Habitat element 9.2 and 
Species at Risk element 10.3(a) of this table. 

• Displacement of wildlife 
species at risk away from the 
Alberta Clipper pipeline area 
during construction. 

• See Wildlife and Wildlife 
Habitat element 9.2 of this 
table. 



 

P
age 6-84 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
10.3(c) mortality of wildlife species at 

risk 
Entire route Footprint to 

Region 
• Implement one or more of the mitigative measures identified in Appendix 6B in the event that 

a wildlife species of concern or critical habitat is discovered during either supplemental field 
studies or construction. [EGC 01-5] 

• Refer to mitigative measures presented under Wildlife and Wildlife Habitat element 9.3 of this 
table. 

• Wildlife mortality rates may 
increase during construction 
as a result of wildlife-vehicle 
collisions. 

• There is potential for 
disturbance of hibernating 
amphibians or reptiles if 
riparian, wetland and aquatic 
habitats cannot be protected 
by mitigation. 

• See Wildlife and Wildlife 
Habitat element 9.3 of this 
table. 

10.3(d) combined effects on northern 
leopard frog 

Habitat identified in 1998: 
KP 655.0 to KP 656.0  
KP 988.0 to KP 993.0 
Souris River (KP 1073.4) 
Cypress River (KP 1131.6) 
 
Northern leopard frogs occurring on 
construction right-of-way during 
Terrace Phase I: 
KP 988.0 to KP 993.0 
Souris River (KP 1073.4) 
 
Observations during October 2006 
field studies: 
Oak Creek (KP 1087.0) 
Cypress River (KP 1131.6) 
Buffalo Creek (KP 1227.4) 

Local, Regional • Abide by construction timing and setback constraints applied to sensitive habitats for species 
with special conservation status (Table 6.4 of the ESA) unless otherwise approved by 
provincial and federal wildlife authorities. [EGC 01-3] 

• Field studies were completed in 1998 prior construction of Terrace Phase I and in select 
locations in October 2006 for the Alberta Clipper pipeline from KP 959.3 to KP 1245.2. 

• Supplemental field studies will be completed for amphibians and their habitat in 
spring/summer 2007(see Section 9.0 of the ESA). All locations along the route where 
northern leopard frogs or their habitat are identified will be noted on the Environmental 
Alignment Sheets and appropriate mitigation employed. 

• Implement one or more of the mitigative measures identified in Appendix 6B in the event that 
northern leopard frogs and/or their habitat are discovered along the route during 
supplemental field studies or during construction. [EGC 01-5] 

• Alteration of wetland and 
riparian habitat as well as 
sensory disturbance and 
potential mortality during 
construction if mitigative 
measures cannot protect 
northern leopard frogs. 

10.3(e) combined effects on 
loggerhead shrike, long-billed 
curlew and burrowing owl 

Habitat identified along route during 
CEP, Terrace Phases I and II 
preconstruction surveys and 
construction activities: 
KP 293.7 [LOSH]2 
KP 390.3 [LOSH]2 
KP 560.4 to KP 566.3 [LBCU]2 
KP 621.8 [LOSH]2  
For burrowing owls identified within 
setback to route during previous 
surveys see 10.3(b) of this table 

Footprint to Local • Abide by construction timing and setback constraints applied to sensitive habitats for species 
with special conservation status (Table 6.4 of the ESA) unless otherwise approved by 
provincial and federal wildlife authorities. [EGC 01-3] 

• Field studies were completed prior construction of CEP, Terrace Phases I and II along the 
Alberta Clipper route and in select locations in October 2006 from KP 959.3 to KP 1245.2. 

• Supplemental field studies will be completed for birds and their habitat in spring/summer 
2007 (see Section 9.0 of the ESA). All locations along the route where loggerhead shrike, 
long-billed curlew and burrowing owl or their habitat are identified will be noted on the 
Environmental Alignment Sheets and appropriate mitigation employed. 

• Implement one or more of the mitigative measures identified in Appendix 6B in the event that 
loggerhead shrikes, long-billed curlew or burrowing owls or their habitat are discovered 
during either supplemental field studies or construction. [EGC 01-5] 

• Alteration of native prairie 
habitat as well as sensory 
disturbance and potential 
mortality during construction if 
mitigative measures cannot 
protect loggerhead shrikes, 
long-billed curlews and 
burrowing owls. 



 

P
age 6-85 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
11. HUMAN OCCUPANCY AND RESOURCE USE 
11.1 Resource Use     
11.1(a) general Entire route Footprint to Local • The pipe will be buried with an adequate depth of cover to allow traffic associated with 

current land use to cross the right-of-way during normal conditions. 
• No residual effect identified. 

11.1(b) disruption of ranching 
operations during construction 

Native prairie, pasture and bush-
pasture  

Footprint to Local • Schedule construction activities to avoid peak livestock grazing periods where feasible. 
• Notify landowners of the proposed construction schedule so livestock can be shifted to 

adjacent fields. [EGC 01-2] 
• Incorporate landowners' special requests into the construction procedures, as indicated on 

the Line List. [EGC 01-3] 
• Narrow work space to avoid encroaching on dugouts, if requested by the landowner (e.g., 

KP 1050.2) (Detail 6A-1). 
• Confine construction equipment and vehicles to the designated construction right-of-way, 

temporary workspace, existing public roads and approved temporary access roads (see 
Traffic Control Plan in Appendix 6C). [EGC 02-2] 

• Brace fences prior to cutting to maintain the tension in the rest of the fence. [EGC 02-9] 
• Install temporary gates and fencing prior to construction, if requested by the landowner, to 

prevent livestock from entering or leaving the property and from entering or accidentally 
falling into the trench. [EGC 02-4, EGC 02-9] 

• Dismantle and carefully store any unique fences for later reassembly. [EGC 02-4, EGC 02-9] 
• Replace fences with equal or better quality materials during clean-up. [EGC 02-9] 
• Maintain and keep closed all gates and fences. 
• Leave gaps in welded pipe, topsoil windrows, spoil piles and snow piles (if present) at 

intervals requested by landowner to permit movement of livestock across the right-of-way. 
• Install trench plugs and leave corresponding gaps in the spoil pile to permit movement of 

livestock to watering and feeding areas, where warranted. 
• Make arrangements with the landowner to provide temporary water supply on pasture lands 

where livestock are located if the livestock are reluctant to cross the right-of-way. 
• Leave 5 m to 6 m wide gaps in temporary fencing erected following construction at cattle and 

game trails. 
• Employ weed control measures listed in Vegetation element 8.5 of this table. 
• Seed disturbed lands used for grazing with the appropriate seed mix as outlined on the 

Environmental Alignment Sheets and in Detail 6A-46. 

• Disruption of ranching 
operations may occur during 
construction. 

11.1(c) disruption of farming activities 
during construction 

Cultivated and hay lands Footprint to Local • Inform landowners of the route location and construction schedule. [EGC 01-2] Attempt to 
avoid peak activity periods where feasible. [EGC 01-3] 

• Incorporate landowners' special requests into the construction procedures, as indicated on 
the Line List. [EGC 01-3] 

• Conduct a preconstruction survey and narrow the temporary workspace, if warranted, to 
avoid encroaching on farmsteads, residences, granaries or sheds. 

• Delay final staking until immediately prior to construction. [EGC 02-3] 
• Leave breaks in topsoil windrow and spoil piles, welded pipe and snow piles (if present) 

where requested to permit landowners' equipment to cross the right-of-way. 
• Compensate landowners if disruption of farming activities or crop loss occurs. 
• Confine construction equipment and vehicles to the designated construction right-of-way, 

temporary workspace, existing public roads and approved temporary access roads (see 
Traffic Control Plan in Appendix 6C). [EGC 02-2] 

• Complete clean-up as soon as practical to minimize disturbance on farming operations. 

• Disruption of farming activities 
may occur during pipeline 
construction. 



 

P
age 6-86 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
11.1(d) disruption of grazing on 

PFRA / community pasture 
lands and grazing leases 

Grazing Leases: 
KP 182.3 to KP 183.6 
KP 195.9 to KP 196.8 
KP 196.8 to KP 197.7 
KP 220.4 to KP 220.6 
KP 224.3 to KP 225.2 
KP 225.2 to KP 225.5 
KP 227.0 to KP 227.1 
Progress PFRA 
(KP 324.6 to KP 331.2; 
(KP 331.6 to KP 332.2) 
Mariposa PFRA 
(KP 347.2 to KP 348.9) 
Macrorie Grazing Co-op 
(KP 503.3 to KP 506.3) 
Elbow PFRA 
(KP 560.4 to KP 566.3) 
Community pasture 
(KP 585.1) 
Dry Creek Grazing Co-op 
(KP 587.3 to KP 590.8) 
Willow Bluff Grazing Co-op 
(KP 596.2 to KP 598.2) 

Footprint to Local • See Human Occupancy and Resource Use element 11.1(b). 
• Limit the construction period (stringing through backfilling) on intensely grazed areas, if 

requested by the landowner. 
• Install Texas gates at access points to the PRFA pastures, if requested by the PFRA 

manager. 
• On PFRA lands, fence work area unless otherwise directed by the PFRA manager. 
• An Environmental Assessment Plan for each PFRA community pasture traversed by the 

Alberta Clipper Project is provided in Appendix V of the ESA. 

• Disruption of grazing activities 
may occur during pipeline 
construction on PFRA / 
community pasture lands or 
grazing leases. 

11.1(e) pivot irrigated lands Locations identified during Terrace 
Phase I and CEP and during fall 
2006 overflight: 
KP 511.4 to KP 513.0 
KP 513.3 to KP 514.3 
KP 514.9 to KP 517.1 
KP 660.1 to KP 661.9 
KP 1088.3 to KP 1088.7 
KP 1089.9 to KP 1090.7 
KP 1092.4 to KP 1093.2 

Footprint to Local • Schedule construction to avoid the irrigation season if practical. 
• Refer to Detail 6A-9 for detailed mitigation measures for irrigated lands. 

• Disruption of irrigation 
activities may occur during 
pipeline construction. 

11.1(f) flood irrigated lands Locations identified during Terrace 
Phase I and CEP: 
KP 509.7 to KP 510.5 
KP 510.5 to KP 511.3 
KP 513.0 to KP 513.3 
KP 514.3 to KP 514.9 
KP 654.4 to KP 654.8 
Additional location identified by 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority: 
KP 301.2 to KP 301.5 

Footprint to Local • Schedule construction to avoid the irrigation season if practical. 
• Refer to Detail 6A-9 for detailed mitigation measures for irrigated lands. 

• Disruption of irrigation 
activities may occur during 
pipeline construction. 

11.1(g) disruption of forestry and 
other natural resources 
extraction, and industrial use 
during construction 

Entire route Footprint to Local • No adverse impacts are expected on resource extraction such as forestry, coal or other 
industrial operations. 

• Refer to Physical Environment element 1.5 of this table regarding contaminated soils if 
encountered at landfill site at KP 365.4 and KP 1245.1.  

• No residual effect identified. 



 

P
age 6-87 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
11.1(h) disturbance of aggregate 

resources 
KP 213.7 to KP 215.1 
KP 595.6 to KP 596.1  
KP 760.5 to KP 760.9 
KP 763.9 
KP 942.5 to KP 942.9 
KP 1193 

Footprint • Narrow down temporary workspace and minimize area of disturbance. 
• From KP 595.6 to KP 596.1, narrow down temporary workspace and consult with pit 

operator. 

• No residual effect identified. 

11.1(i) disruption of hunting activities 
during construction 

Entire route Local • Contact landowners and hunting guides prior to construction and provide maps and 
schedules of the proposed construction activities to enable them to select alternate areas of 
activity. 

• Place an announcement in local papers to notify hunters and guides of the location and 
timing of construction if scheduled during autumn. 

• No impacts on trapping activities are expected since there are no registered traplines located 
along the route. 

• Local hunters and guide 
outfitters may experience 
some minor disturbance of 
their activities during pipeline 
construction. 

11.1(j) interference with navigation 
on watercourses during 
construction 

Eagle Creek (KP 393.6, KP 425.9) 
South Saskatchewan River 
(KP 505.2 to KP 506.1) 
Qu'Appelle River (KP 657.0) 
Wascana Creek (KPR 45.5) 
Chapleau Lakes (KP 783.3) 
Souris River (KP 1073.4) 

Footprint to Local • Enbridge is requesting a determination of navigability of watercourses not included in past 
projects along the Alberta Clipper route (e.g., CEP, Terrace Phases I and II). 

• Schedule construction activities at waterways deemed navigable by Transport Canada 
during fall and winter, if feasible. 

• Obtain Navigable Waters approval from Transport Canada if an instream construction 
method is used or temporary bridge is installed for construction access.  

• Follow all conditions of Navigable Waters Approval and, at a minimum, implement the 
following measures: 
- notify the public of the hazards associated with water crossing construction and the 

schedule for crossing construction; 
- place warning signs up and downstream of the crossing. Signs are to be legible at a 

distance of 100 m; and 
- where warranted, place signs at boat launches, place notices in local and regional 

newspapers and on radio programs, place lights on banks and assign picket boats with 
bull horns. 

• The navigability of the watercourses deemed navigable will not be affected by the Alberta 
Clipper pipeline during operations since the pipeline will be buried under the watercourse and 
the temporary bridges, if used during construction, will be installed with an approved amount 
of freeboard and will be removed as per approval conditions.  

• The navigability of 
watercourses deemed a 
navigable waterway may be 
affected during pipeline 
construction. 

11.1(k) alteration of surface water 
supply and quality for 
downstream water users 

see Tables 5.27 and 5.28 of the ESA Footprint to 
Regional 

• Notify water users up to 2 km downstream of the crossing a minimum of 10 days prior to 
instream activity at water crossings and withdrawal or discharge of hydrostatic test water. 

• Refer to Water Quality and Quantity element 3.10 of this table. 

• No residual effect identified. 

11.1(l) alteration of well water flow 
and quality 

Entire route Footprint • Normal pipeline construction methods (i.e., trenching) are not anticipated to affect any water 
wells identified in the vicinity of the Alberta Clipper pipeline route. 

• Monitor all registered or known water wells within 200 m of any blasting before and after 
blasting. Provide alternate water supply, if warranted, where well monitoring indicates that a 
reduction in water quality or quantity has occurred due to blasting. 

• See Water Quality and 
Quantity element 3.9(a) of this 
table. 

11.1(m) disturbance of golf course Kerrobert Golf Course 
(KP 341.7 to KP 341.9) 
Kemoca Regional Park Golf Course 
(KP 792.3 to KP 792.7 ) 
Minnewasta Golf & Country Club 
(KP 1196.8 to KP 1197.0) 

Footprint • Prepare a detailed Urban Construction Plan for the golf course to address right-of-way and 
temporary workspace, the construction period, the workday hours, soils handling, fencing 
and other safety measures, reclamation measures and other special requests of the facility 
(see Section 9.0 of the ESA). 

• Postpone construction across the golf course until after fall closure, if practical. 
• Minimize temporary workspace and narrow down area of disturbance. 

• Disruption of golfing activities 
may occur during pipeline 
construction. 



 

P
age 6-88 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
11.1(n) disturbance of Kemoca 

Regional Park 
Kemoca Regional Park  
(KP 791.5 to KP 791.8; 
KP 792.3 to KP 792.7 ) 

Footprint • Prepare a detailed Urban Construction Plan for the park to address right-of-way and 
temporary workspace, the construction period, the workday hours, soils handling, fencing 
and other safety measures, reclamation measures and other special requests of the facility 
(see Section 9.0 of the ESA). 

• Schedule construction through the Kemoca Regional Park during the fall or winter, if 
practical. 

• Disruption of recreational 
activities at Kemoca Regional 
Park may occur during pipeline 
construction. 

11.1(o) disturbance of 
environmentally significant 
area 

Sounding-Sunken  
(KP 217.4 to KP 230.9) 

Footprint • The proposed route follows existing linear disturbances for 100% of its length through the 
Sounding-Sunken Environmentally Significant Area.  

• Plant and wildlife field studies will be completed in the spring and summer of 2007 along 
segments of the route within the environmentally significant area supporting native 
vegetation, along major watercourse valleys and where unique features are encountered to 
identify locations of plant species or communities at risk (see Section 9.0 of the ESA).  

• Implement one or more of the mitigative measures identified in Appendix 6B in the event that 
a plant species at risk or wildlife species of concern or critical habitat is discovered during 
either supplemental field studies or construction. [EGC 01-5] 

• Seed noncultivated disturbed areas with the appropriate native or agronomic seed mix as 
indicated on the Environmental Alignment Sheets as soon as weather and soil conditions 
permit following final clean-up [EGC 03-4].  

• Implement appropriate reclamation measures as indicated on the Environmental Alignment 
Sheets to address site-specific conditions that may result in problems revegetating disturbed 
areas (e.g., chipping slash and spreading over areas with very sandy soils; straw crimping on 
areas with high wind erosion potential or are otherwise difficult to revegetate; installation of 
diversion berms and ditches on slopes) (Details 6A-5, 6A-23 and 6A-45). [EGC 02-4, EGC 
03-4] 

• Alteration of lands along the 
proposed route within the 
Sounding-Sunken 
Environmentally Significant 
Area will occur. 

11.1(p) disturbance of WHPA lands see Tables 5.67 and 5.92 of the ESA Footprint • See Vegetation element 8.1 and 8.3(a) of this table. 
• See Wildlife and Wildlife Habitat element 9.1(e) of this table. 

• See Vegetation element 8.1 
and 8.3(a) of this table. 

• See Wildlife and Wildlife 
Habitat element 9.1(e) of this 
table. 

11.2 Human Occupancy     
11.2(a) disturbance of nearby 

residents and yards during 
construction 

Entire route Footprint • Protect public safety near populated areas (e.g., residences, Vibank, Fairlight, Schazenfeld, 
Nesbitt, Chortitz, Gretna) by controlling public access. See measures identified for 
disturbance or encroachment on urban areas element 11.2(b) of this table. Safety measures 
in these areas include:  
- fencing off all road and trail entrances to the worksite to avoid potential interactions with 

local traffic and pedestrians;  
- posting warning signs at approaches to the construction site from both directions;  
- keeping the construction spread tight (i.e., minimizing length between trenching and 

backfilling activities) in close proximity to residences and communities to limit the 
duration of open trench, as much as practical;  

- allowing space for safe crossing by pedestrians and cyclists; and 
- implement 24-hr security, where warranted. 

• Contractor is to develop a Public Traffic Control Plan and implement measures to ensure 
public safety at road and highway crossings. [EGC 02-2] 

• See Greenhouse Gases and Air Quality element 4.2-4.4 and Acoustic Environment element 
5.1 of this table for measures pertaining to nuisance air and noise emissions, respectively. 

• See Vegetation element 8.6 of this table for measures regarding ornamental trees, wind 
breaks and shelterbelts. 

• See GHG and Air Quality 
element 4.2-4.4 and Acoustic 
Environment element 5.1 of 
this table. 

• See Vegetation element 8.6 of 
this table. 



 

P
age 6-89 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
11.2(b)  disturbance or 

encroachment on urban 
areas 

Town of Dodsland 
(KP 366.5 to KP 368.2) 
Village of Montmartre 
(KP 790.6 to KP 791.6) 
Village of Maryfield 
(KP 936.0 to KP 937.4) 
Town of Morden 
(KP 1195.1 to KP 1198.0) 

Footprint to Local • Prepare a detailed Urban Construction Plan for the urban area to address right-of-way and 
temporary workspace, the construction period, the workday hours, soils handling, fencing 
and other safety measures, reclamation measures and other special requests of the facility 
(see Section 9.0 of the ESA). The following measures will, where appropriate, form part of 
the Urban Construction Plan. 
- fencing off all road and trail entrances to the worksite to avoid potential interactions with 

local traffic and pedestrians;  
- posting warning signs at approaches to the construction site from both directions;  
- considering the use of small diameter or landscaping equipment where workspace is 

restricted; 
- removing topsoil and subsoil and store at a remote location if there is limited storage 

space 
- salvaging trees and shrubs, where encountered, for replanting or plant nursery stock; 
- keeping the construction spread tight (i.e., minimizing length between trenching and 

backfilling activities) in close proximity to residences and communities to limit the 
duration of open trench, as much as practical;  

- allowing space for safe crossing by pedestrians and cyclists; and 
- implement 24-hr security, where warranted. 

• See Greenhouse Gases and 
Air Quality element 4.2-4.4 
and Acoustic Environment 
element 5.1 of this table. 

11.2(c)  encroachment on 
farmsteads, residences, 
granaries, sheds or dugouts 

Entire route Footprint • Conduct a pre-construction survey and narrow down the temporary workspace if warranted 
or requested, to avoid encroaching upon farmsteads, residences, granaries, sheds or 
dugouts. 

• No residual effect identified. 

11.2(d) potential alteration of 
recreational experience 
during construction  

Entire route Footprint to Local • Provide ASRD, SENV, Manitoba Conservation with proposed construction schedule and 
Alberta Clipper pipeline route maps, and install signs at recreational access points notifying 
users of construction activities in the vicinity. 

• Place notices to hunters in local newspapers indicating the route and proposed construction 
schedule along route segments scheduled for fall construction. 

• A decrease in the quality of the 
outdoor recreation experience 
may occur at select locations 
during pipeline construction. 

12. HERITAGE RESOURCES 
12.1 Disturbance of identified 

surface heritage resource 
sites prior to construction  

FcOq 15 and FcOq 16 at Ribstone 
Creek crossing (KP 213.9) 
KP 511.4 to KP 511.5 
(Historic Indian Reserve) 
See Tables 5.94 and 5.95 of the 
ESA for locations along the 
segments of the route in 
Saskatchewan and Manitoba 

Footprint • The route generally follows existing linear disturbances (i.e., Enbridge pipeline corridor), 
thereby minimizing the potential for encountering historical resources. 

• Past HRIAs for Terrace Phases I and II identified several sites on or adjacent to the route.  
• An investigation of known sites in proximity to the proposed pipeline route will be undertaken 

(see Section 9.0 of the ESA). Implement appropriate measures identified in the Heritage 
Resources Discovery Contingency Plan (Appendix 6B) in the event of discovery of 
archaeological or historical sites during the investigation. 

• Surface sites may be disturbed 
during HRIAs and site 
investigations. 

12.2 Disturbance of previously 
unidentified heritage 
resource sites during 
construction 

Entire route Footprint • Implement the Heritage Resources Discovery Contingency Plan in Appendix 6B in the event 
that previously unidentified archaeological or historical sites are discovered during 
construction. 

• Suspend construction activity in the vicinity of any historical, archaeological or 
palaeontological resources discovered during construction until authorized by provincial 
authorities. [EGC 02-2] 

• Resume work once permission has been granted from the provincial authorities. 

• Previously unidentified buried 
heritage resources may be 
disturbed during pipeline 
construction. 



 

P
age 6-90 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
12.3 Disturbance of palaeontological 

resources 
Lands with higher palaeontological 
potential including: 
High Hill Creek 
(KP 666.8 to KP 667.0) 
Cottonwood Creek 
(KPR 12.0 to KPR 12.5) 
Deadhorse Creek valley and 
adjacent lands 
(KP 1196.3 to KP 1197.0) 

Footprint • A palaeontological investigation of lands with higher palaeontological potential in 
Saskatchewan, including lands in the Kerrobert area, meltwater channels, High Hill and 
Cottonwood Creeks, and lands in the vicinity of Deadhorse Creek in Manitoba will be 
undertaken in spring 2007 prior to construction (see Section 9.0 of the ESA). 

• Implement contingency measures identified in the Heritage Resources Discovery 
Contingency Plan (Appendix 6B) in the event of discovery of palaeontological finds during 
the supplemental study. 

• Suspend construction activity in the vicinity of any palaeontological resources discovered 
during construction until authorized by provincial authorities. [EGC 02-2] 

• Palaeontological resources 
may be disturbed as a result of 
pipeline construction activities. 

13. TRADITIONAL LAND AND RESOURCE USE 
13.1 Disturbance of Swan Lake 

Indian Reserve No. 7 lands 
KP 1138.4 to KP 1139.1 Footprint • Present land use along the segment of the proposed route through the Swan Lake Indian 

Reserve No. 7 is hay.  
• Salvage a blade width of topsoil centred over the trench during both nonfrozen and frozen 

conditions (Detail 6A-10).  
• Follow applicable soil protection measures outlined in Soil Capability element 2 of this table. 
• Revegetate hay lands with the appropriate agronomic seed mix as indicated in Detail 6A-46 

and on the Environmental Alignment Sheets. 
• See also Human Occupancy and Resource Use element 11.1(c) of this table. 

• Disruption of farming activities 
on the Swan Lake Indian 
Reserve No. 7 may occur 
during pipeline construction. 

13.2 Groundwater quality and 
quantity in nearby aquifer 

KP 1119 to KP 1142 Local • See mitigation described under Water Quality and Quantity element 3.9(b) of this table. • No residual effect identified. 

13.3 Site-specific traditional land use 
concerns 

Entire route Footprint to Local • Enbridge has initiated consultation with Aboriginal groups with interest in the proposed 
Alberta Clipper Project including the Swan Lake Ojibway First Nation (see Section 6 of the 
Alberta Clipper Project Application). 

• Should any site-specific concerns arise during the ongoing consultation process, Enbridge 
will attempt to resolve the issue using the Indigenous Peoples Policy as a guide.  

• No residual effect identified. 

14. SOCIAL AND CULTURAL WELL-BEING 
14.1 Influx of temporary construction 

workers 
Hardisty, Kerrobert, Kindersley, 
Rosetown, Moose Jaw, Regina, 
Kipling, Virden, Brandon, Morden, 
Winkler, Altona 

Local to Region • Local communities will be notified 21 days minimum prior to the scheduled establishment of 
construction offices or arrival of pipe. 

• During the Environmental Training Program, advise construction workers, inspectors and 
support personnel on the expectations regarding code of conduct for Alberta Clipper workers 
when using community facilities and services. 

• For the temporary Hardisty construction camp, Enbridge or its contractor must clearly define 
rules, reprimands, security protocols and other expectations of Project workers utilizing the 
camp. Implement 24-hr security at the construction camp to deter unruly behaviour. 

• The construction of the Alberta 
Clipper Project will result in a 
temporary increase in the local 
community population. 

15. HUMAN HEALTH 
15.1 Nuisance air emissions (e.g., 

vehicle exhaust, dust, smoke) 
Entire route Footprint to 

Region 
• See Greenhouse Gases and Air Quality element 4.2 of this table. • See Greenhouse Gases and 

Air Quality element 4.2 of this 
table. 

15.2 Nuisance noise emissions Entire route Footprint to Local • See Acoustic Environment element 5.1 of this table. • See Acoustic Environment 
element 5.1 of this table. 

15.3 Public safety Entire route Footprint • See Human Occupancy and Resource Use element 11.2(a) and (b) of this table. • See Human Occupancy and 
Resource Use element 11.2(a) 
and (b) of this table. 



 

P
age 6-91 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
16. INFRASTRUCTURE AND SERVICES 
16.1 Infrastructure     
16.1(a) transportation of workers and 

supplies 
Entire route Footprint to 

Region 
• Transport workers between the Hardisty construction camp and other muster areas to work-

sites by multi-passenger vehicles to the extent practical.  
• Advise all Alberta Clipper-related vehicles to follow applicable traffic, road-use and safety 

laws. 
• The contractor will develop a traffic management plan to manage vehicular movements on 

highways and local roads.  

• Increased traffic on highways 
and local roads used to access 
the proposed right-of-way will 
occur during pipeline 
construction. 

16.1(b) disruption to transmission 
lines and pipelines 

Entire route Footprint to 
Region 

• Locate and flag all existing buried utility lines and cables to be crossed by the pipeline prior 
to the commencement of ground disturbance activities by using "one call" services or direct 
contact with utility owners.  

• Expose all underground utility lines and cables to be traversed by the pipeline in accordance 
with prescribed methods as detailed in the construction specifications.  

• Use flagging and signage at overhead line crossings to alert equipment operators of hazards. 

• See Accidents and 
Malfunctions element 18.3 of 
this table. 

16.1(c) waste management during 
construction 

Entire route Footprint to 
Region 

• Collect waste from work site on a daily basis to avoid the attraction of nuisance animals. 
Ensure waste containers accompany each working unit. Do not dispose of waste in the 
trench. [EGC 02-2] 

• Locate temporary toilets at convenient locations on/along the construction site. [EGC 02-2] 
• Ensure the construction site is left in a tidy and organized condition at the end of each day. 

[EGC 02-2] 
• Transport and dispose all wastes in accordance with provincial and federal regulatory 

requirements and local guidelines. 
• Follow criteria and regulations set out by WHMIS and the Transportation of Dangerous 

Goods. 
• Follow measures outlined in Enbridge's Waste Management Plan currently on file with the 

NEB.  

• Temporary increase in waste 
flow to regional landfill sites 
will occur. 

16.1(d) worker accommodation needs 
may displace tourists  

Alberta Local to Region • Enbridge or its contractor is to install a temporary construction camp to accommodate Project 
workers associated with all components of the Alberta Clipper Project in the Hardisty area 
due to the limited availability of local and regional accommodation. 

• Treat sewage and grey water as per municipal and provincial permits. Dispose of waste in 
accordance with municipal and provincial permits as well as the Enbridge Waste 
Management Plan currently on file with the NEB. 

• Obtain approval from the applicable regulatory authority prior to withdrawing water from 
nearby water source for use in the temporary construction camp. Otherwise, haul fresh water 
to camps. 

• Local or regional tourist 
accommodations along the 
proposed route will be 
temporarily occupied by 
Alberta Clipper Project 
workers primarily in 
Saskatchewan and Manitoba. 

 Saskatchewan  
Manitoba 

Local to Region • In the event that accommodations are limited in any of the communities selected as 
construction offices, expand existing RV parks, set up temporary construction work camps, 
or work with local hotel/motel operators to increase the occupancy of the motel rooms. 

 

16.2 Services     
16.2(a) provision of emergency 

services 
Entire route Local to Region • Provide key Alberta Clipper Project contact numbers, Alberta Clipper pipeline route maps, 

pump station/terminal maps and the construction schedule to the local and regional RCMP, 
fire departments, hospitals/medical facilities and ambulance services. 

• Adhere to all safety standards during the construction and operation of the Alberta Clipper 
Project. 

•  

• Despite best intentions and 
work practices, incidents 
arising during construction 
may warrant the use of 
emergency services. 



 

P
age 6-92 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
16.2(a) provision of emergency 

services 
Same as above Same as above • Train construction workers on fire prevention and control. Contractors are to follow the fire 

prevention measures outlined in the Fire Contingency Plan (Appendix 6B). 
• Ensure contractors provide First Aid attendants. 
• Contact local emergency medical services to ensure that services can be used if necessary. 
• Implement 24-hr security at the Hardisty construction camp to minimize strain on the local 

police force. 

• Same as above 

16.2(b) recreational opportunities for 
workers 

Entire route Local to Region • Ample public recreation is available in the vicinity of the proposed pipeline route. Use of 
facilities by workers is unlikely to burden the facilities or displace local residents. 

• No residual effect identified. 

17. EMPLOYMENT AND ECONOMY 
17.1 Employment opportunities Entire route Region • Local motel, gas station, hardware, restaurant and campground owners will receive 

increased business during the construction season. Some of the construction subcontractors 
may be local or employ local labourers.  

• No increase or decrease in local business opportunities or employment is anticipated during 
the operational phase. 

• Enbridge is committed to a procurement program that actively promotes local opportunity, 
including Aboriginal businesses. 

• Local businesses and 
residents will benefit from the 
Alberta Clipper Project through 
employment opportunities. 

17.2 Revenue Entire route Region • Revenue payments by Enbridge are substantial and are considered beneficial by 
governments. 

• The Alberta Clipper Project will 
generate revenue for 
municipal, provincial and 
federal governments. 

18. ACCIDENTS AND MALFUNCTIONS 
18.1 Spills of hazardous materials 

during construction 
Entire route Footprint to Local Spill Prevention 

• Place an impervious tarp when servicing equipment/vehicles with the potential for accidental 
spills (e.g., oil changes, servicing of hydraulic systems). 

• Ensure that no fuel, lubricating fluids, hydraulic fluids, antifreeze, herbicides, biocides or 
other chemicals are dumped on the ground or into any watercourse. [EGC 02-2] 

• Ensure that bulk fuel trucks, service vehicles and pick-up trucks equipped with box-mounted 
fuel tanks carry spill prevention, containment and clean-up materials that are suitable for the 
volume of fuels or oils carried. Carry spill contingency material on bulk fuel and service 
vehicles that is suitable for use on land and water (i.e., sorbent pads, sorbent boom and 
rope). Carry additional spill prevention and clean-up material, and equipment such as a tarp, 
shovel and heavy plastic bags in bulk fuel trucks, service trucks and pick-ups with box-
mounted fuel tanks. 

• Do not store fuel, oil or hazardous material within 100 m of a waterbody except where 
secondary containment is provided. [EGC 02-2] 

• Refuel and service mobile equipment a minimum of 100 m from bodies of water and on road 
allowances, where feasible. 

• Inspect hydraulic, fuel and lubrication systems of equipment used in water crossing 
construction to ensure that the systems are in good condition and free of leaks. Clean 
equipment to be used instream or adjacent to a waterbody or otherwise ensure equipment is 
free of grease, oil or other fluids, mud, dirt and vegetation, both prior to and entering the 
waterbody and upon completion of instream activity. [EGC 02-2] 

• Spot spills, once remediated, 
will have little adverse residual 
effect, although other 
resources could be affected or 
lost as a result of the accident. 



 

P
age 6-93 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
18.1 Spills of hazardous materials 

during construction (cont’d) 
Same as above Same as above In the Event of a Spill 

• Report spills immediately to the Chief Inspector and Environmental Inspector and, if 
warranted, appropriate government agencies in accordance with the Spill Contingency Plan 
in Appendix 6B. 

• Implement the Spill Contingency Plan outlined in Appendix 6B. The plan includes measures 
to be undertaken in the event of a spill on land, ice and in water.  

• Same as above 

18.2 Fire during construction Bush/Wooded Areas Footprint to Local Fire Prevention 
• Note that all contractor personnel must participate in a safety and environmental training 

session, which will include instruction on the use of fire fighting equipment. 
• Allow landowners to harvest mature crops and mow any remaining crops prior to the initiation 

of construction activities. 
• Ensure that personnel are made aware of proper disposal methods for welding rods, 

cigarette butts and other hot or burning material. Do not burn when the fire hazard is high. 
• Do not smoke in the open on the right-of-way when the fire hazard is high. Smoke only within 

designated areas. 
• Ensure that exhaust and engine systems of equipment are in good working condition and 

inspect undercarriages periodically to ensure that grasses do not accumulate. Do not leave 
vehicles idling for extended periods of time when the fire hazard is high. [EGC 02-2] 

• When the fire hazard is rated high or extreme, the following are prohibited on the right-of-
way: 
- vehicles parking on tall grass or stubble; 
- fires; 
- dropping cigarette butts and used welding rods on the ground. 

[EGC 02-2] 
• Maintain a fire truck on the right-of-way when the fire hazard is high or extreme and air 

temperatures allow. [EGC 02-2] 
• Ensure that each crew carries at a minimum, two shovels, one fire extinguisher, one two-way 

radio or cell phone as well as two pulaskis (see also the Fire Contingency Plan outlined in 
Appendix 6B). 

• Ensure that slash burning crews have fire fighting equipment on hand that is capable of 
controlling any fire that may occur as a result of their activities as regulated by provincial 
regulations and government agencies. 

• Do not burn slash if the fire hazard is high. If burning is delayed, store slash along the right-
of-way, in natural clearings, or approved push-outs. Resume burning once the fire hazard is 
low.  

In the Event of Fire 
• Follow the fire suppression measures of the Fire Contingency Plan as outlined in 

Appendix 6B. 

• Despite vigilance, fires may 
adversely affect adjacent 
vegetation, and, in very rare 
situations, affect wildlife and 
adjacent property. 



 

P
age 6-94 

TABLE 6.2  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential Effect Location  Project Boundary Recommendations/Mitigative Measures [EGC Reference]1 Residual Effect(s) 
18.3 Damage to foreign lines, 

Enbridge pipelines and cables 
during construction 

Entire route Footprint Foreign Lines and Cables 
• Locate and flag all known foreign lines and cables by using “one call” services.  
• Carefully expose all known locations of underground facilities in accordance with prescribed, 

safe methods.  
• Use flagging and signage at overhead line crossings to alert equipment operators of hazards. 
Enbridge Pipeline System 
• Conduct construction activities in the vicinity of existing Enbridge pipelines in compliance 

with all requirements of CSA Z662 and the NEB Onshore Pipeline Regulations for work close 
to an operating pipeline. 

• Rupture of water, sewage, gas 
or other lines could lead to 
interruption of services, 
contamination of soil or water 
depending on the location and 
severity of the rupture and 
fires in the case of gas. Cable 
damage can lead to 
interrupted service of the utility 
to communities and local 
residences. 

18.4 Release of drilling mud during 
horizontal directional drilling 

South Saskatchewan River  
(KP 505.2 to KP 506.0) 
Qu'Appelle River (KP 657.1) 
Souris River (KP 1073.4) 

Footprint to Local • Utilize an inert, nontoxic bentonitic clay-based material as drilling mud. [EGC 02-11] 
• Implement the Directional Drilling Procedures and Instream Drilling Mud Release 

Contingency Plan in the event of a release (see Appendix 6B). 
• Dispose of drilling mud on cultivated privately-owned lands in accordance with EUB G-050 

Drilling Waste Management Guidelines and ID 99-05 and other applicable provincial 
regulations and guidelines. 

• Release of drilling mud on 
land, once cleaned-up and 
reclaimed, will have little 
residual effect. 

• Depending on the volume and 
location of the release, a 
release of drilling mud into a 
watercourse may affect 
aquatic ecosystems in the 
short to medium-term. 

18.5 Line break caused by third 
party damage or corrosion 

Entire route Footprint to Local • Enbridge has an integrity management system in place to minimize the risk of pipeline failure 
during operations. These company programs are discussed in detail in Section 8.0 of the 
ESA. 

• Enbridge has implemented a comprehensive Emergency Response Plan which is fully 
described in Section 8.0 of the ESA. 

• Select block valve locations to control spill volumes to acceptable levels. Consider use of 
remotely controlled valves. 

• In the event of a release into such watercourses as Eyehill Creek or the South 
Saskatchewan River, immediately implement Enbridge's Emergency Response Plan and 
request communities with water intakes downstream of the crossing to shut off intake valves 
(e.g., Macklin, Outlook). Provide an alternate water source, if warranted, until regulatory 
agencies deem the water supply suitable for human consumption. 

• A pipeline failure may 
adversely affect adjacent soils, 
vegetation, wildlife habitat and 
aquatic ecosystems, including 
aquifers. 

Notes: 1 Detailed mitigative measures are outlined in Enbridge's EGC currently on file with the NEB. 
 2 Species codes: BUOW = burrowing owl; LOSH = loggerhead shrike; LBCU = long-billed curlew; NLFR = northern leopard frog. 



 

P
age 6-95 

TABLE 6.3 
 

WATERCOURSE CROSSING SUMMARY FOR THE ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

Vehicle Crossing Pipeline Crossing 
Location 

(KP) 
Legal 

Location Watercourse 
Reported Fish 

Presence1,2 

Fish 
Habitat 

Potential3 
Instream 

RAP 

Mean 
Monthly 

Streamflow 
(m³/s) 

[Sampled 
Flow]4 

Channel 
Width 

(m) 

Mean 
Water 
Depth 

(m) 
If Water 
Present If Dry / Frozen Within RAP Outside RAP 

Bank 
Restoration 

Approach Slope 
Mitigation 

ALBERTA              
213.9 14 27-40-

6 W4M 
Ribstone Creek 
(tributary to Battle 
River) 

NRPK, WHSC in lower 
stretches below 
multiple weirs 

Nil Class D 
No RAP 

0.008 to 
0.608 

undefined -- ford with swamp 
mats6 

ford with swamp mats6/ 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

N/A isolate13 if water 
present 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

N/A 

272.2 7-35-37-
01 W4M 

Eyehill Creek 
 (tributary to Manitou 
Lake) 

NRPK, WHSC, LKWH, 
BRST, FTMN, 
American smelt 

Nil to 
Poor 
given weir 
500 m 
downstrea
m 

Class C 
Apr 16 – 
Jun 30 

0.009 to 
0.402 

21.8 m 0.39 m 
(07/93) 

temporary 
bridge7  or 
existing vehicle 
crossing 

ford with swamp mats6 if 
dry/snow fill10 or ice 
bridge11 

trenchless12 isolate13 if water 
present 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

N/A 

SASKATCHEWAN              
288.5 5-5-37-27 

W3M 
Unnamed Drainage  
(drains into Cactus 
Lake) 

-- TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD 

291.7 8-33-36-
27 W3M 

Unnamed Drainage  
(drains into Cactus 
Lake) 

-- TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD 

352.2 16-27-33-
22 W3M 

Intermittent Drainage 
(drains into White 
Heron Lake) 

-- TBD No RAP5 [dry] TBD TBD TBD TBD N/A TBD TBD TBD 

365.3 16-2-33-
21 W3M 

Unnamed Creek 
(tributary to Eagle 
Creek) 

-- TBD No RAP5  [dry] TBD TBD TBD TBD N/A  TBD TBD TBD 

366.9 7-1-33-21 
W3M 

Unnamed Creek 
(tributary to Eagle 
Creek) 

-- TBD No RAP5  [dry] TBD TBD TBD TBD N/A  TBD TBD TBD 

383.0 9-16-32-
19 W3M 

Unnamed Creek 
(tributary to Eagle 
Creek) 

-- TBD No RAP5  [dry] TBD TBD temporary 
bridge7 

culvert9 or ford with 
swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

N/A isolate13 if water 
present 
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

stabilize with cross 
ditches and berms17 

384.9 1-15-32-
19 W3M 

Unnamed Creek 
(tributary to Eagle 
Creek) 

-- TBD No RAP5  [dry] TBD TBD temporary 
bridge7 

culvert9 or ford with 
swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

N/A isolate13 if water 
present 
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

N/A 

390.2 4-8-32-18 
W3M 

Unnamed Creek 
(tributary to Eagle 
Creek) 

-- TBD No RAP5  [dry] TBD TBD temporary 
bridge7 

culvert9 or ford with 
swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

N/A isolate13 if water 
present 
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

stabilize with cross 
ditches and berms17 

391.3 15-5-32-
18 W3M 

Intermittent Drainage 
(drains into Eagle 
Creek) 

-- TBD No RAP5  [dry] TBD TBD temporary 
bridge7 

culvert9 or ford with 
swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

N/A isolate13 if water 
present 
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

stabilize with trench 
breakers, if 
required, cross 
ditches and berms17 

393.6 5-3-32-18 
W3M 

Eagle Creek 
(tributary to North 
Saskatchewan River) 

BRST, LKCH, FTMN, 
NRPK, YLPR, SHRD, 
PRDC, IWDR, 
LNDC, SPSH, RVSH, 
LNSC, WHSC 

Low April 1 – 
May 31 

0.022 to 
2.19 

5.0 
(wetted 
width) 

0.28 
(05/98) 

temporary 
bridge7,8 

temporary bridge6 or 
existing bridge / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

HDD12 isolate13 if water 
present 

Recontour, use 
geotextiles17 to 
stabilize as 
necessary, 
reseed16, fence  

N/A 

 



 

P
age 6-96 

TABLE 6.3  Cont'd 

Vehicle Crossing Pipeline Crossing 
Location 

(KP) 
Legal 

Location Watercourse 
Reported Fish 

Presence1,2 

Fish 
Habitat 

Potential3 
Instream 

RAP 

Mean 
Monthly 

Streamflow 
(m³/s) 

[Sampled 
Flow]4 

Channel 
Width 

(m) 

Mean 
Water 
Depth 

(m) 
If Water 
Present If Dry / Frozen Within RAP Outside RAP 

Bank 
Restoration 

Approach Slope 
Mitigation 

410.8 9-18-31-
16 W3M 

Intermittent Drainage 
(drains into Eagle 
Creek) 

-- TBD TBD [dry] TBD TBD temporary 
bridge7 

ford with swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

TBD isolate13 if water 
present 
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

N/A 

416.2 9-10-31-
16 W3M 

Drainage Ditch 
(drains into Eagle 
Creek) 

-- TBD No RAP [dry] TBD TBD ford with swamp 
mats6 

ford with swamp mats6 N/A open cut14 N/A N/A 

421.3 8-6-31-15 
W3M 

Intermittent Drainage 
(drains into Eagle 
Creek) 

-- TBD TBD [dry] TBD TBD temporary 
bridge7 

ford with swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

TBD isolate13 if water 
present 
 
open cut if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

N/A 

423.6 14-32-30-
15 W3M 

Intermittent Drainage 
(drains into Eagle 
Creek) 

-- TBD No RAP5 [dry] TBD TBD temporary 
bridge7 

ford with swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

N/A isolate13 if water 
present 
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

stabilize with trench 
breakers, if 
required, cross 
ditches and berms17 

426.0 2-33-30-
15 W3M 

Eagle Creek 
(tributary to North 
Saskatchewan River) 

BRST, NRPK, YLPR 
FTMN, IWDR, LKCH, 
LNDC, LNSC, PRDC, 
RVSH, SHRD, SPSH, 
WHSC 

Low April 1 – 
May 31 

0.022 to 
2.19 

8.0 
(wetted) 

0.38 
(05/98) 

temporary 
bridge7,8 

snow fill10 or ice bridge11 HDD12 isolate13 if water 
present 

recontour 
 
reseed16, fence 
until established 

temporary and 
permanent berms, 
silt fence on east 
slope17 

KPM 3.0 14-09-29-
11 W3M 

MacDonald Creek 
(tributary to South 
Saskatchewan River) 

-- Low No RAP5 0.00 to 1.10 27.0 0.8 
(05/98) 

temporary 
bridge7 

snow fill10 or ice bridge11/ 
culvert9 if dry 

N/A isolate13 if water 
present 
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

stabilize with cross 
ditches and 
berms17, fence off 
east bank from 
cattle 

498.4 13-4-28-8 
W3M 

Irrigation Canal 
(tributary to South 
Saskatchewan River) 

FTMN Nil No RAP 0.00 to 8.5 16.5 
(wetted) 

1.05 
(thalwa
g depth 
07/93) 

cross according to water crossing agreement     

505.2 -
506.0 

NW 31-
27-7 W3M 

South Saskatchewan 
River 
(tributary to 
Saskatchewan River) 

RNTR, LKWH, 
WHSC, LNSC, 
BRTR, BRST, BURB, 
CISC, EMSH, FTMN, 
FLCH, GOLD, IWDR, 
LKST, LKCH, LNDC, 
MOON, NRPK, QUIL, 
RVSH, SAUG, SHRD, 
SPSC, SPSH, 
TRPR, WALL, YLPR 
BKTR, MNWH, 
NRDC, SLRD 

Moderate Oct 1 – 
July 15 
(for spring 
and fall 
spawners 
with lake 
sturgeon, 
no lake 
trout) 

175 to 825 400 
(wetted 
width) 

0.6 
(05/98) 

existing bridge existing bridge HDD12 TBD / contingency 
open cut14 

TBD stabilize east slope 
with straw crimping, 
berms, silt fences, 
and coconut 
matting17 

507.8 2-32-27-7 
W3M 

Irrigation Canal 
(drains into South 
Saskatchewan River) 

-- Nil No RAP  [dry] TBD TBD cross according to water crossing agreement     

509.5 11-28-27-
7 W3M 

Irrigation Canal 
(drains into South 
Saskatchewan River) 

-- Nil No RAP  [dry] TBD TBD cross according to water crossing agreement     

510.0 7-28-27-7 
W3M 

Irrigation Canal 
(drains into South 
Saskatchewan River) 

-- Nil No RAP  [dry] TBD TBD cross according to water crossing agreement     



 

P
age 6-97 

TABLE 6.3  Cont'd 

Vehicle Crossing Pipeline Crossing 
Location 

(KP) 
Legal 

Location Watercourse 
Reported Fish 

Presence1,2 

Fish 
Habitat 

Potential3 
Instream 

RAP 

Mean 
Monthly 

Streamflow 
(m³/s) 

[Sampled 
Flow]4 

Channel 
Width 

(m) 

Mean 
Water 
Depth 

(m) 
If Water 
Present If Dry / Frozen Within RAP Outside RAP 

Bank 
Restoration 

Approach Slope 
Mitigation 

510.3 8-28-27-7 
W3M 

Irrigation Canal 
(drains into South 
Saskatchewan River) 

-- Nil No RAP  [dry] TBD TBD cross according to water crossing agreement     

510.4 8-28-27-7 
W3M 

Unnamed Creek 
(tributary to South 
Saskatchewan River) 

-- TBD No RAP5  TBD TBD TBD temporary 
bridge7 

snow fill10 or ice bridge11/ 
ford with swamp mats6 if 
dry 

N/A isolate13 if water 
present 
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

N/A 

511.2 3-27-27-7 
W3M 

Irrigation Canal 
(drains into South 
Saskatchewan River) 

-- Nil No RAP  [dry] TBD TBD cross according to water crossing agreement     

512.4 9-22-27-7 
W3M 

Irrigation Canal 
(drains into South 
Saskatchewan River) 

-- Nil No RAP  [dry] TBD TBD cross according to water crossing agreement     

513.3 6-23-27-7 
W3M 

Irrigation Canal 
(drains into South 
Saskatchewan River) 

-- Nil No RAP  [dry] TBD TBD cross according to water crossing agreement     

514.5 1-23-27-7 
W3M 

Irrigation Canal 
(drains into South 
Saskatchewan River) 

-- Nil No RAP  [dry] TBD TBD cross according to water crossing agreement     

515.0 13-13-27-
7 W3M 

Irrigation Canal 
(drains into South 
Saskatchewan River) 

-- Nil No RAP  [9.5] 20 
(wetted) 

1.3 
(05/98) 

cross according to water crossing agreement     

517.1 2-18-27-6 
W3M 

Unnamed Creek 
(tributary to South 
Saskatchewan River) 

-- TBD No RAP5  TBD undefined -- temporary 
bridge7 

snow fill10 or ice bridge11 N/A isolate13 if water 
present 
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

N/A 

586.7 7-13-23-1 
W3M 

Iskwao Creek 
(tributary to Qu'Appelle 
River) 

-- TBD No RAP5  0.00 to 
0.121 

TBD TBD temporary 
bridge7 

ford with swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

N/A isolate13 if water 
present 
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

stabilize with trench 
breakers, if 
required, cross 
ditches and berms17 

596.2 6-36-22-
29 W2M 

Unnamed Creek 
(tributary to Qu'Appelle 
River) 

BRST, FTMN Low No RAP [0.0012] 15 
(wetted) 

0.04 
(05/98) 

temporary 
bridge7 

ford with swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

N/A isolate13 if water 
present 
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

N/A 

614.5 15-28-21-
27 W2M 

Unnamed Drainage 
(drains into Qu'Appelle 
River) 

-- TBD No RAP5  undefined -- temporary 
bridge7 

ford with swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

N/A isolate13 if water 
present 
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

stabilize with cross 
ditches and berms17 

657.1 4-18-19-
23 W2M 

Qu’Appelle River 
(tributary to 
Assiniboine River) 

WALL, WHSC, 
CARP, NRPK, 
bigmouth buffalo 

Moderate 
- high 

April 1 – 
May 31 

1.06 to 22.6 13.2 
(wetted) 

1.77 
(05/98) 

existing / 
temporary 
bridge7,8 

existing or temporary 
bridge6 

HDD12 TBD Recontour, 
install brush 
layers and use 
geotextiles to 
stabilize as 
necessary17, 
reseed16 

stabilize with trench 
breakers, if 
required, cross 
ditches and berms17 

662.7 1-4-19-23 
W2M 

Unnamed Creek 
(tributary to Qu’Appelle 
River) 

FTMN, BRST Low No RAP5 [0.004] 0.5 
(wetted) 

0.1 
(05/98) 

temporary 
bridge7 

ford with swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

N/A open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

N/A 



 

P
age 6-98 

TABLE 6.3  Cont'd 

Vehicle Crossing Pipeline Crossing 
Location 

(KP) 
Legal 

Location Watercourse 
Reported Fish 

Presence1,2 

Fish 
Habitat 

Potential3 
Instream 

RAP 

Mean 
Monthly 

Streamflow 
(m³/s) 

[Sampled 
Flow]4 

Channel 
Width 

(m) 

Mean 
Water 
Depth 

(m) 
If Water 
Present If Dry / Frozen Within RAP Outside RAP 

Bank 
Restoration 

Approach Slope 
Mitigation 

666.9 16-27-18-
23 W2M 

High Hill Creek 
(tributary to Qu’Appelle 
River) 

FTMN, BRST, NRPK, 
YLPR, 
WALL 

Low Apr 1 - 
May 31 

[0.008] 30 
(ponded) 

0.37 
(05/98) 
 

temporary 
bridge7 / ford 
with swamp 
mats6 if dry  

ford with swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

bore12 isolate13 if water 
present / 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16, fence 

stabilize with trench 
breakers, if 
required, cross 
ditches and berms17 

KPR 12.1 SW 25-
17-22 
W2M 

Cottonwood Creek 
(tributary to Qu'Appelle 
River) 

 BRST, FTMN, WHSC 
May contain NRPK, 
WALL in downstream 
stretches 

Nil, many 
barriers 

No RAP 0.002 to 
2.26 

TBD TBD temporary 
bridge7 

ford with swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

N/A isolate13 if water 
present  

recontour 
 
reseed16 

stabilize with trench 
breakers, if 
required, cross 
ditches, berms, and 
straw crimp17  

KPR 15.7 SW 20-
17-21 
W2M 

Unnamed Drainage  
(drains into 
Cottonwood Creek) 

-- TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD 

KPR 39.7 3-33-16-
19 W2M  

Unnamed Drainage 
(drains into slough) 

-- TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD 

KPR 39.9 2-33-16-
19 W2M  

Unnamed Drainage 
(drains into slough) 

-- TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD 

KPR 40.2 2-33-16-
19 W2M  

Unnamed Drainage 
(drains into slough) 

-- TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD 

KPR 40.6 4-34-16-
19 W2M  

Unnamed Drainage 
(drains into slough) 

-- TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD 

KPR 40.9 4-34-16-
19 W2M  

Drainage Ditch 
(drains into slough) 

-- TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD 

KPR 45.5 NW 36-
16-19 
W2M 

Wascana Creek 
(tributary to Qu'Appelle 
River) 

WHSC, NRPK, 
CARP(?) 

TBD Apr 1 - 
May 31 

0.497 to 
10.4 

TBD TBD temporary 
bridge7,8 

snow fill10 or ice bridge11/ 
ford with swamp mats6  if 
dry 

bore12 isolate13 if water 
present  

recontour 
 
reseed16 

N/A 

KPR 51.0 13-34-16-
18 W2M 

Unnamed Creek 
(tributary to Wascana 
Creek) 

-- TBD TBD  TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD 

KPR 60.7 13-27-16-
17 W2M 

Unnamed Creek 
(tributary to Wascana 
Creek) 

-- TBD TBD  TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD 

KPR 67.1 5-29-16-
16 W2M 

Kronau Creek 
(tributary to Wascana 
Creek) 

-- TBD TBD  TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD 

KPR 69.5 3-28-16-
16 W2M 

Kronau Creek 
(tributary to Wascana 
Creek) 

-- TBD TBD  TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD 

KPR 72.0 16-22-16-
16 W2M 

Unnamed Creek 
(tributary to Manybone 
Creek) 

-- TBD TBD  TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD 

KPR 73.7 16-23-16-
16 W2M 

Unnamed Creek 
(tributary to Manybone 
Creek) 

-- TBD TBD  TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD 

746.1 6-20-16-
15 W2M 

Unnamed Drainage4 
(tributary to Kronau 
Creek) 

-- Low No RAP [<0.02] 20.4 
(wetted) 

0.41 
(05/98) 
 

temporary 
bridge7 

ford with swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

N/A isolate13 if water 
present  
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

N/A 

773.7 6-14-15-
13 W2M 

Swale or Unnamed 
Drainage 
(drains into Chapleau 
Lakes) 

-- TBD No RAP5  [dry] TBD TBD existing bridge ford with swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

N/A isolate13 
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

N/A 



 

P
age 6-99 

TABLE 6.3  Cont'd 

Vehicle Crossing Pipeline Crossing 
Location 

(KP) 
Legal 

Location Watercourse 
Reported Fish 

Presence1,2 

Fish 
Habitat 

Potential3 
Instream 

RAP 

Mean 
Monthly 

Streamflow 
(m³/s) 

[Sampled 
Flow]4 

Channel 
Width 

(m) 

Mean 
Water 
Depth 

(m) 
If Water 
Present If Dry / Frozen Within RAP Outside RAP 

Bank 
Restoration 

Approach Slope 
Mitigation 

775.1 3-13-15-
13 W2M 

Unnamed Drainage 
(drains into Chapleau 
Lakes) 

-- TBD No RAP5  TBD TBD TBD existing bridge snow fill10 or ice bridge11 N/A isolate13 if water 
present  
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

N/A 

783.3 4-11-15-
12 W2M 

Chapleau Lakes NRPK, YLPR, BLBL, 
WHSC, 9 non-
sportfish 

High TBD - 150 m 
(wetted) 

TBD TBD TBD open cut14 open cut14 recontour 
 
reseed16 

N/A 

785.3 14-1-15-
12 W2M 

Unnamed Drainage 
(drains into Chapleau 
Lakes) 

-- TBD No RAP5 [dry] TBD TBD temporary 
bridge7 

snow fill10 or ice bridge11 N/A isolate13 if water 
present  
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

N/A 

820.3 8-17-14-8 
W2M 

Vipond Creek 
(tributary to Moose 
Mountain Creek) 

FTMN Low TBD 0.001 4.3 
(wetted) 

0.49 
(05/98) 

temporary 
bridge7 

ford with swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

TBD isolate13 if water 
present  
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

stabilize with trench 
breakers, if 
required, cross 
ditches and berms17 

868.7 7-7-13-3 
W2M 

Intermittent Creek 
(tributary to Pipestone 
Creek) 

-- TBD TBD  TBD TBD TBD temporary 
bridge7 

ford with swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

TBD isolate13 if water 
present  
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

TBD 

871.5 14-4-13-3 
W2M 

Montgomery Creek 
(tributary to Pipestone 
Creek) 

-- TBD TBD  TBD TBD TBD TBD  culvert9  TBD open cut14 recontour 
 
reseed16 

N/A 

873.0 5-3-13-3 
W2M 

Unnamed Creek 
(tributary to 
Montgomery Creek) 

-- TBD TBD  TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD 

907.1 4-26-11-
33 WPM 

Little Pipestone Creek 
(tributary to Pipestone 
Creek ) 

LKCH Low TBD 0.03 4.2 
(wetted) 

0.19 
(05/98) 

temporary 
bridge7 

ford with swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

TBD isolate13 if water 
present   
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16, fence 

TBD 

932.3 9-23-10-
31 WPM 

Jackson Creek 
(tributary to Souris 
River ) 

BRST, FNDC, NRPK TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD 

942.5 7-11-10-
30 WPM 

Stony Creek 
(tributary to Souris 
River ) 

NRPK TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD temporary 
bridge7 

ford with swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

HDD12 isolate13 if water 
present  
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

TBD 

MANITOBA              
951.6 9-34- 9-29 

WPM 
Pipestone Creek 
(tributary to Souris 
River) 

NRPK, YLPR, WALL, 
IWDR, FTMN, PRDC, 
BRST 

TBD April 1 – 
June 15 

TBD TBD TBD temporary 
bridge7 

ford with swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

HDD12 isolate13 if water 
present  

recontour 
 
reseed16 
TBD 

stabilize with trench 
breakers, if 
required, cross 
ditches, berms and 
temporary silt 
fence17 

952.4 12-35-9-
29 WPM 

Intermittent Drainage 
(drains into Pipestone 
Creek) 

-- TBD TBD  TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD 



 

P
age 6-100 

TABLE 6.3  Cont'd 

Vehicle Crossing Pipeline Crossing 
Location 

(KP) 
Legal 

Location Watercourse 
Reported Fish 

Presence1,2 

Fish 
Habitat 

Potential3 
Instream 

RAP 

Mean 
Monthly 

Streamflow 
(m³/s) 

[Sampled 
Flow]4 

Channel 
Width 

(m) 

Mean 
Water 
Depth 

(m) 
If Water 
Present If Dry / Frozen Within RAP Outside RAP 

Bank 
Restoration 

Approach Slope 
Mitigation 

955.0 10-25-9-
29 WPM 

Intermittent Creek 
(drains into Pipestone 
Creek) 

-- TBD TBD  TBD TBD TBD temporary 
bridge7 

ford with swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 TBD 

open cut14 if dry recontour 
 
reseed16 

stabilize with cross 
ditches, berms and 
temporary silt 
fence17 

958.0 13-20-9-
28 WPM 

Intermittent Creek 
(drains into Pipestone 
Creek) 

-- TBD TBD  TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD 

1065.8 5-25-7-18 
WPM 

Black Creek 
(tributary to Souris 
River) 

WHSC, NRPK Low No RAP [dry] 0.54 0.15 existing / 
temporary 
bridge7 

ford with swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

N/A  isolate13 if water 
present 
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

recontour 
 
stabilize with 
geotextiles17 
 
reseed16 

1073.4 10-22-7-
17 WPM 

Souris River 
(tributary to 
Assiniboine River) 

NRPK, WALL, 
WHSC, BLDC, BLDR, 
LNDC, SHRD, SNSH, 
TRPR,  
ROBA, CHLA  
Bivalves 

Low-High April 1 – 
July 31 

0.922 to 
39.2 

45.5 0.35 existing / 
temporary 
bridge7,8 

ice bridge11 HDD12 HDD12,15 if trenched, 
recontour banks 
and mid-channel 
gravel bar 
 
stabilize with 
geotextiles, live 
shrub stakes, 
brush layers17 
 
reseed16 
 
armour18 if 
warranted 

recontour 
 
stabilize with trench 
breakers, berms, 
subdrains17, as 
required 
 
reseed16 

KPW 5.1 16-18-7-
16 WPM 

Spring Brook 
(tributary to Oak 
Creek) 

NRPK, LKCH, CRCH, 
FTMN, PRDC, BRST 

Low-
Moderate 

April 1 – 
June 15 

[0.14] 1.0 
(wetted 
width) 

0.5 temporary 
bridge7 

snow fill10 or ice bridge11 HDD12 isolate13 if water 
present 
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

-- 

KPW 6.1 13-17-7-
16 WPM 

Unnamed Creek 
(tributary to Spring 
Brook) 

BRST Nil-Low No RAP [dry] -- -- ford with swamp 
mats6 

ford with swamp mats6/  
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

N/A isolate13 if water 
present  
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
stabilize with 
geotextiles17 
 
reseed16 

-- 

1083.6 8-15-7-16 
WPM 

Unnamed Creek 
(tributary to Oak 
Creek) 

--- No fish 
habitat 
potential 

No RAP [dry] undefined -- ford or culvert9 ford N/A open cut14 reseed16 -- 

1087.0 1-13-7-16 
WPM 

Oak Creek 
(tributary to Souris 
River) 

NRPK, WHSC, PRDC, 
BLDC, EMSH, JHDR 
Northern leopard 
frog 

Low-High April 1 – 
June 15 

0.012 to 
1.07 

12.4 0.1 existing/ 
temporary 
bridge7 

ford with swamp mats6 /  
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

HDD12 isolate13 if water 
present 
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

stabilize with 
geotextiles and 
brush layers17 
 
reseed16 
 
fence off from 
cattle until 
vegetation re-
established 

-- 



 

P
age 6-101 

TABLE 6.3  Cont'd 

Vehicle Crossing Pipeline Crossing 
Location 

(KP) 
Legal 

Location Watercourse 
Reported Fish 

Presence1,2 

Fish 
Habitat 

Potential3 
Instream 

RAP 

Mean 
Monthly 

Streamflow 
(m³/s) 

[Sampled 
Flow]4 

Channel 
Width 

(m) 

Mean 
Water 
Depth 

(m) 
If Water 
Present If Dry / Frozen Within RAP Outside RAP 

Bank 
Restoration 

Approach Slope 
Mitigation 

1109.3 7-31-6-13 
WPM 

Oak Creek 
(Tributary to the Souris 
River) 

WHSC,  
NRPK, FTMN, CRCH 
Bivalves 

Low-High April 1 – 
June 15 

0.012 to 
1.07 

12.0 0.3 temporary 
bridge7 

ford with swamp mats6 / 
ice bridge11 

HDD12 isolate13 if water 
present 
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

salvage and 
replace upper 
substrate and 
bank materials 
to allow natural 
revegetation of 
cattails and 
grasses 

-- 

1110.3 4-32-6-13 
WPM 

Oak Creek 
(tributary to Souris 
River) 

WHSC, BRST, CRCH, 
IWDR, FTMN, NRPK 

Low-High April 1 – 
June 15 

0.012 to 
1.07 

48.0 0.3 existing/ 
temporary 
bridge7 

ford with swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

HDD12 isolate13 if water 
present 
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

reseed16 
 
fence off from 
cattle until 
vegetation re-
established 

-- 

1120.1 15-18-6-
12 WPM 

Cypress River 
(tributary to 
Assiniboine River) 

WHSC, CMSH, 
LNDC, CRCH, SNSH, 
FNDC,CNMD, FTMN, 
JHDR 

Low-
Moderate 

April 1 – 
June 15 

0.040 to 
4.03 

3.2 
(wetted 
width) 

0.2 temporary 
bridge7 

ford with swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

HDD12 isolate13 if water 
present 
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

-- 

1131.5 16-31-5-
11 WPM 

Cypress River 
(tributary to 
Assiniboine River) 

WHSC, BLDC, 
CMSH, LNDC, SNSH, 
LKCH, BLBL, PRDC, 
CRCH, EMSH, JHDR, 
FTMN, NRPK  
Northern leopard 
frog 

Low-High April 1 – 
June 15 

0.040 to 
4.03 

11.4 0.3 existing/ 
temporary 
bridge7 

ice bridge11 HDD12 isolate13 if water 
present 
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

reseed16 
 
fence off from 
cattle until 
vegetation re-
established 

recontour 
 
stabilize with trench 
breakers, berms, 
subdrains, as 
required17 
 
reseed16 

1139.9 11-24-5-
11 WPM 

Intermittent Creek 
(tributary to Pembina 
River) 

--- No fish 
habitat 
potential 

No RAP [0] undefined -- culvert9 ford with swamp mats6 N/A isolate13 if water 
present 
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
stabilize with 
geotextiles or silt 
fencing17 
 
reseed16 

recontour 
 
stabilize with trench 
breakers, berms, 
cross ditches and 
subdrains, as 
required17 
 
reseed16 

1141.3 SW 19-5-
10 WPM 

Intermittent Creek NOT SAMPLED, 
NO LAND ACCESS 

TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD 

1164.0 14-18-4-8 
WPM 

Mary Jane Creek  
(tributary to Pembina 
River) 

--- Nil-Low No RAP 0.017 to 
1.57 

2.1 
(wetted 
width) 

0.1 ford with swamp 
mats6 

ford with swamp mats6/ 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

N/A isolate13 if water 
present 
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

-- 

1175.7 16-31-3-7 
WPM 

Unnamed Drainages 
(drains into Lizard 
Lake) 

--- No fish 
habitat 
potential 

No RAP [0] undefined -- ford or culvert9 ford N/A open cut14 reseed16 -- 

1183.5 13-24-3-7 
WPM 

Unnamed Creek  
(tributary to Thornhill 
Coulee) 

FTMN, LKCH 
(suspected to have 
come from nearby 
dugout during 
precipitation event) 

Low No RAP [< 0.002] undefined -- ford with swamp 
mats6  

ford with swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

N/A isolate13 if water 
present  
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
stabilize with 
geotextiles17 
 
reseed16 

-- 



 

P
age 6-102 

TABLE 6.3  Cont'd 

Vehicle Crossing Pipeline Crossing 
Location 

(KP) 
Legal 

Location Watercourse 
Reported Fish 

Presence1,2 

Fish 
Habitat 

Potential3 
Instream 

RAP 

Mean 
Monthly 

Streamflow 
(m³/s) 

[Sampled 
Flow]4 

Channel 
Width 

(m) 

Mean 
Water 
Depth 

(m) 
If Water 
Present If Dry / Frozen Within RAP Outside RAP 

Bank 
Restoration 

Approach Slope 
Mitigation 

1186.3 2-19-3-6 
WPM 

Thornhill Coulee 
(tributary to Shannon 
Creek) 

FTMN, BRST Low-High April 1 – 
June 15 

[0.04] 4.0 
(wetted 
width) 

0.1 temporary 
bridge7 

ford with swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

HDD12 isolate13 if water 
present  
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
stabilize with 
geotextiles and 
brush layers17 
 
reseed16 

recontour  
 
stabilize with silt 
fences, trench 
breakers, berms 
and cross ditches, 
subdrains, as 
required17 
 
reseed16 

1196.6 16-35-2-6 
WPM 

Deadhorse Creek 
(tributary to Red River) 

PUMP, CRCH, 
WHSC, WALL, FTMN, 
LKCH, BRST, BLCR, 
NRPK 

Low-High April 1 – 
June 15 

0.007 to 
1.32 

9.0 0.5 temporary 
bridge7 

ford with swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

HDD12 isolate13 if water 
present  
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
stabilize with 
geotextiles and 
brush layers17 
 
reseed16 

recontour 
 
stabilize with trench 
breakers, berms, 
cross ditches, silt 
fencing and 
subdrains, as 
required17 

1205.4 1-26-2-5 
WPM 

Unnamed Drainage 
(drains into Hespeler 
Creek) 

--- No fish 
habitat 
potential 

No RAP [dry] undefined -- ford or culvert9 ford N/A open cut14 reseed16 -- 

1206.5 15-24-2-5 
WPM 

Unnamed Drainage 
(drains into Hespeler 
Creek) 

--- No fish 
habitat 
potential 

No RAP [dry] undefined -- ford or culvert9 ford N/A open cut14 reseed16 -- 

1211.1 13-16-2-4 
WPM 

Hespeler Creek 
(tributary to Deadhorse 
Creek) 

--- Low-High No RAP [0] 2.8 0.00 temporary 
bridge7 
drive around to 
south side of 
residential 
properties 

snow fill10 or ice bridge11 N/A isolate13 if water 
present  
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
stabilize with 
geotextiles17 
 
reseed16 

-- 

1220.1 12-5-2-3 
WPM 

Rosenheim Drain 
(tributary to Red River) 

--- Nil-Low No RAP [dry] undefined 
-- 

ford with swamp 
mats6 

ford with swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

N/A isolate13 if water 
present  
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

reseed16 
 
fence off from 
cattle until 
vegetation re-
established 

-- 

1224.4 10-34-1-3 
WPM 

Buffalo Drain 
(Tributary to Buffalo 
Creek) 

--- No fish 
habitat 
potential 

No RAP [dry] undefined 
-- 

ford with swamp 
mats6 

ford with swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

N/A isolate13 if water 
present  
 
open cut14 if dry 

reseed16 --- 

1227.4 13-25-1-3 
WPM 

Buffalo Creek 
(tributary to Red River) 

BLBL, CRCH 
Crayfish, northern 
leopard frog 

Low for 
sports fish 

No RAP [0] 2.3 0.2 culvert9 or ford 
with swamp 
mats6 

ford with swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

N/A isolate13 if water 
present  
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16 
 
fence off from 
cattle until 
vegetation re-
established 

--- 

1231.6 10-20-1-2 
WPM 

Drainage Channel 
(tributary to Buffalo 
Creek) 

BLBL, CRCH, WHSC Low-High No RAP [0] 7.5 0.2 existing/ 
temporary 
bridge7 
culvert9 
ford with swamp 
mats6 

ford with swamp mats6 / 
snow fill10 or ice bridge11 

N/A isolate13 if water 
present  
 
open cut14 if dry or 
frozen to bottom 

recontour 
 
reseed16 

-- 



 

P
age 6-103 

TABLE 6.3  Cont'd 

Vehicle Crossing Pipeline Crossing 
Location 

(KP) 
Legal 

Location Watercourse 
Reported Fish 

Presence1,2 

Fish 
Habitat 

Potential3 
Instream 

RAP 

Mean 
Monthly 

Streamflow 
(m³/s) 

[Sampled 
Flow]4 

Channel 
Width 

(m) 

Mean 
Water 
Depth 

(m) 
If Water 
Present If Dry / Frozen Within RAP Outside RAP 

Bank 
Restoration 

Approach Slope 
Mitigation 

1239.5 9-12-1-2 
WPM 

Drainage Channel 
(tributary to Buffalo 
Creek) 

--- No fish 
habitat 
potential 

No RAP [dry] undefined 
-- 

ford or culvert9 ford N/A open cut14 reseed16 -- 

1241.4 8-7-1-1 
WPM 

Drainage Channel 
(tributary to Buffalo 
Creek) 

--- No fish 
habitat 
potential 

No RAP [dry] undefined 
-- 

ford or culvert9 ford N/A open cut14 reseed16 -- 

Notes: 1 Fish species listed in bold text include those species that were captured during field investigations conducted in 1993, (EMA 1993), 1996 (Golder 1996), 1998 (RL&L 1998), and 2006 (AAR 2007). The remaining species listed are those that have 
been reported to occur in the watercourse, but were not captured during sampling. 

 2 Species Codes:  
BLBL Black bullhead CHLA Chestnut lamprey IWDR Iowa darter NRDC Northern redbelly dace RVSH River shiner 
BLCR Black crappie CNMD Central mudminnow JHDR Johnny darter NRPK Northern pike SNSH Sand shiner 
BLDC Western blacknose dace CMSH Common shiner LKCH Lake chub PRDC Pearl dace SHRD Shorthead redhorse sucker 
BLDR Blacksided darter CRCH Creek chub LKWH Lake whitefish PUMP Pumpkinseed SPSC Spoonhead sculpin 
BRST Brook stickleback EMSH Emerald shiner LKST Lake sturgeon QUIL Quillback SPSH Spottail shiner 
BRTR Brook trout FLCH Flathead chub LNDC Longnose dace RNTR Rainbow trout TRPR Trout-perch 
BURB Burbot FNDC Finescale dace LNSC Longnose sucker ROBA Rock bass WALL Walleye 
CARP Common carp FTMN Fathead minnow MNWH Mountain whitefish SAUG Sauger WHSC White sucker 
CISC Cisco GOLD Goldeye MOON Mooneye SLRD Silver redhorse YLPT Yellow perch 

 3 Fish habitat potential was determined during field investigations Refer to Section 5.1.6 for additional fish habitat information. 
 4 Historical streamflow data were used to determine the range of mean monthly streamflow (Environment Canada 2006). Where historical data is not available, discharge rates measured during field investigations conducted in the spring of 1998 and 

fall of 2006 are indicated in square brackets (AAR 2007 and RL&L 1998). Refer to Section 5.1.3.4 for additional streamflow information. 
 5 No timing constraint previously applied 
 6 See Detail 6A-26 for mitigative measures to be implemented if swamp mats are used to provide forded construction access. 
 7 See Detail 6A-25 for mitigative measures to be implemented if a temporary single span bridge is installed for construction access. 
 8 Obtain Navigable Waters approval from Transport Canada if a temporary bridge is installed for construction access at Eagle Creek (KP 393.6 and KP 426.0),the Qu'Appelle River (KP 657.1), Wascana Creek (KPR 45.5) or Souris River (KP 1073.4). 
 9 See Detail 6A-29 for mitigative measures to be implemented if a ramp and culvert is used to provide construction access. 
 10 See Detail 6A-28 for mitigative measures to be implemented if a snow fill is used to provide construction access. 
 11 See Detail 6A-27 for mitigative measures to be implemented if an ice bridge is used to provide construction access. 
 12 Where a trenchless crossing method is required, use a horizontal directional drill (Detail 6A-35) or bore and punch (Detail 6A-34) technique. 
 13 Use a flume or dam and pump isolation technique outside the instream restricted activity period (where applicable) if the watercourse is flowing (Details 6A-31 and 6A-32). A high volume dam and pump isolation technique may be used where 

warranted (Detail 6A-33). 
 14 Use an open cut pipeline installation technique outside the restricted activity period (where applicable) (Detail 6A-30). 
 15 Use a channel diversion isolation technique outside the restricted activity period at the Souris River in the event that a horizontal directional drill method is not successful (Detail 6A-36). 
 16 Seed disturbed watercourse banks and approach slopes with an approved native cover crop and seed mix as soon as feasible after construction (prior to spring freshet wherever possible) (Details 6A-49, 6A-46). 
 17 Implement bank and slope stabilization measures according to the following details: live shrub staking (Detail 6A-38), hedge/brush layering (Detail 6A-39), erosion control matting (Detail 6A-40), silt fences (Detail 6A-24), subdrains (Detail 6A-19), 

trench breakers (Detail 6A-20), and cross ditches/berms (Detail 6A-23). 
 18 Install riprap armour to protect banks if risk of erosion or slumping is high (Detail 6A-37). 
 TBD = to be determined 

 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-104 
 
 

TABLE 6.4 
 

TIMING CONSTRAINTS AND SETBACKS FOR SENSITIVE WILDLIFE RECOMMENDED BY 
FEDERAL AND PROVINCIAL AGENCIES 

Recommended Guidelines 
Timing Restriction Setback Distance 

Species1 
(Critical Habitat, e.g., 

Nests or Dens) AB SK MB AB SK MB 
HERPETILE       
snapping turtle --- March 15 - June 30 

(Nest sites)3 
--- --- 400 m3 --- 

April 1 - Sept. 30 
(hibernacula)3 

200 m3 prairie rattlesnake year round (hibernacula)2 

Oct. 1 - March 31 
(hibernacula)3 

--- 200 m2 

200 m3 

--- 

April 1 - Sept. 30 
(hibernacula)3 

200 m3 western hognose snake year round (hibernacula)2 

Oct. 1 - March 31 
(hibernacula)3 

--- 200 m2 

200 m3 

--- 

April 1 - Sept. 30 
(hibernacula)3 

200 m3 smooth green snake --- 

Oct. 1 - March 31 
(hibernacula)3 

--- --- 

200 m3 

--- 

eastern yellow-bellied 
racer 

year round (hibernacula)5 year round (hibernacula)3 year round (hibernacula)4 150 m5 1,000 m3 150 m4 

short-horned lizard year round (suitable habitat)2 March 15 - Nov. 15 (eroded 
slopes, blue-shale outcrops)3 

March 15 - Nov. 154 100 m2 200 m3 100 m4 

AMPHIBIAN       
Canadian toad year round (ponds used for 

living, breeding or 
hibernating)2 

--- --- 100 m2 --- --- 

great plains toad year round5 year round (ponds used for 
breeding, living, or 
hibernating)3 

year round4 200 m5 500 m3 200 m4 

northern leopard frog April 1 - Oct. 31 (breeding 
and dispersal, pre-winter)5 

April 1 - Oct. 31 (ponds used 
for breeding, living, or 
hibernating)3 

April 1 - Oct. 31 (breeding 
and dispersal, pre-winter)4 

100 m5 500 m4 100 m4 

plains spade foot toad year round (ponds used for 
living, breeding or 
hibernating)2 

year round (ponds used for 
breeding , living, or 
hibernating)3 

--- 100 m2 90 m3 --- 

BIRD       
American bittern --- May 1 - July 31 (nest site)3 --- --- 400 m3 --- 
American white pelican year round (nesting colony)2 April 1 - July 31 

(nesting colony)3 
--- 1,000 m2 1,000 m3 --- 

bald eagle year round (nest site)2 March 15 - July 15 
(nest site)3 

--- 1,000 m2 1,000 m3 --- 

black-crowned night 
heron 

--- April 1 - July 31 (nesting 
colony)3 

--- --- 1,000 m3 --- 

April 15 - Aug. 15 
(active nest)4 

500 m4 

Aug. 15 - Sept. 15 (den)4 200 m4 
July 16 - Oct. 15 
(dispersal, pre-migration)4 

150 m4 

burrowing owl year round (nest site)2 year round (nest site)3 

Oct. 16 - March 31 (winter)4 

500 m2 500 m3 

100 m4 
Caspian tern --- May 1 - July 15 

(nesting colony)3 
--- --- 400 m3 --- 

common tern --- May 1 - July 15 
(nesting colony)3 

--- --- 400 m3 --- 

Cooper's hawk --- April 1 - July 31 (nest site)3 --- --- 400 m3 --- 
double crested 
cormorant 

--- April 1 - July 31 
(nesting colony)3 

--- --- 1,000 m3 --- 

eared grebe --- May 15 - July 15 
(nesting colony)3 

--- --- 200 m3 --- 

 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-105 
 
 

TABLE 6.4  Cont’d 

Recommended Guidelines 
Timing Restriction Setback Distance 

Species1 
(Critical Habitat, e.g., 

Nests or Dens) AB SK MB AB SK MB 
eastern screech owl --- March 1 - July 15 (nest site)3 --- --- 400 m3 --- 
ferruginous hawk year round (nest site)2 March 15 - July 15 

(nest site)3 
March 15 - July 15 
(nest site)4 

1,000 m2 1,000 m3 500 m4 

Forster's tern --- May 1 - July 15 (nesting 
colony)3 

--- --- 400 m3 --- 

Franklin's gull --- May 1 - July 15 (nesting 
colony)3 

--- --- 400 m3 --- 

golden eagle year round (nest site)2 Feb. 15 - July 15 (nest site)3 --- 1,000 m2 1,000 m3 --- 
great blue heron year round (nesting colony)2 April 1 - July 31 (nesting 

colony)3 
--- 1,000 m2 1,000 m3 --- 

April 15 - July 15 (active 
nest)4 

250 m4 loggerhead shrike May 1 - Aug. 15 (nest site)5 May 1- Aug. 15 (nest site)3 

May 1 - Aug. 15 (nest site)4 

100 m5 400 m3 

100 m4 
long-billed curlew April 15 - July 15 (nest site)2 April 15 - July 15 (nest site)3 April 15 - July 15 (active 

nest)4 
200 m2 200 m3 250 m4 

mountain plover May 1 - July 31 (nest site)5 May 1 - July 31 (nest site)3 May 1 - July 31 (nest site)5 300 m5 500 m3 300 m5 
osprey --- May 1 - Aug 15 (nest site)3 --- --- 1,000 m3 --- 
peregrine falcon year round (nest site)2 April 1 - Aug. 15 (nest site)3 April 1 - Aug. 15 (nest site)4 1,000 m2 1,000 m3 400 m4 

May 31 - July 31 (nesting 
beaches during nesting and 
brood rearing)5 

May 31 - July 31 (nesting 
beaches during nesting and 
brood rearing)4 

300 m5 300 m4 piping plover 

year round (high water 
mark)2 

May 1 - Sept. 30 (high water 
mark)3 

Aug. 1 - Sept. 30 (nesting 
beaches during dispersal 
and migration)4 

200 m2 

600 m3 

100 m4 

prairie falcon year round (nest site)2 March 15 - July 15 
(nest site)3 

--- 1,000 m2 1,000 m3 --- 

red-headed 
woodpecker 

April 15 - June 30 (nests)5 April 15 - June 30 (nest site)3 April 15 - July 154 50 m5 100 m3 100 m4 

year round (lek)2 year round (lek)3 March 1- July 15 (leks)5 1,000 m2 1,000 m3 750 m5 
April 15 - June 15 (nests)5 250 m5 

greater sage grouse 
April 15 - June 15 (nests)5 April 15 - June 15 (nest site)3 

July 16 - Feb. 29 (leks)5 
250 m5 500 m3 

500 m5 
sage thrasher year round (nest site)2 May 15 - June 30 (nest site)3 May 15 - June 30 (nest site)4 200 m2 200 m3 100 m4 
sharp-tailed grouse year round (lek)2 Mar 15 - May 15 (lek)3 --- 500 m2 400 m3 --- 

March 25 - Aug. 1 (nest site)5 200 m5 short-eared owl 
April 1 - July 31 (nest site)2 

March 25 - Aug. 1 (nest site)3 March 25 - Aug. 1 (nest site)4 
400 m2 

500 m3 200 m4 

snowy plover --- May 1 - July 31 (nest site)3 --- --- 500 m3 --- 
April 15 - July 15 (nest site)2 100 m2 Sprague's pipit 
April 21 - Aug. 31 (nest site)5 

April 21 - Aug. 31 (nest site)3 April 21 - Aug. 31 (nest site)5 
100 m5 

250 m3 100 m5 

trumpeter swan --- April 1 - July 31 (nest site)3 --- --- 1,000 m3 --- 
western grebe --- May 15 - July 15 (nesting 

colony)3 
--- --- 200 m3 --- 

whooping crane May 1 - Aug. 15 
Sept 15- Nov 1 (staging 
areas)5 

May 1 - Aug. 15, Sept. 15 - 
Nov. 1 (staging)5 

May 1 - Aug. 15, Sept 15 - 
Nov 1 (staging areas)4 

1,000 m5 1,000 m5 1,000 m4 

yellow rail May 1 - July 15 (nests)5 May 1 - July 15 (nest site)3 May 1 - July 15 (nests)5 100 m5 350 m3 100 m5 
MAMMAL       

Feb. 15 - Aug. 31 (breeding, 
rearing, emergence)5 

Feb. 15 - Aug. 31 (breeding, 
rearing, emergence)5 

500 m5 500 m5 swift fox 

year round (den)2 

year round (den)3 

Sept. 1 - Feb. 14 (winter)5 500 m2 

2,000 m3 

250 m5 
black-tailed prairie dog year round (colonies)5 year round (colony)3 year round (colonies)5 125 m5 500 m3 125 m5 

April 1 - Aug. 15 (breeding)5 April 1 - Aug. 15 (breeding)5 100 m5 100 m5 
Aug. 16 - Nov. 15 (pre-
winter)5 

Aug. 16 - Nov. 15 (pre-
winter)5 

250 m5 250 m5 

Nov. 16 - March 31 (winter)5 100 m5 

Ord's kangaroo rat 

year round (den)2 

year round (den)3 

Nov. 16 - March 31 (winter)5 
100 m2 

500 m3 

100 m5 

 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-106 
 
 

TABLE 6.4 Cont’d 

Notes:  1 Setback distances and timing restrictions are not available for all sensitive species with potential to occur in the project area. For a complete list of 
species of concern with potential to occur in the vicinity of the Project, see Appendix 5E of this ESA. Refer to the Wildlife Species of Concern 
Discovery Contingency Plan (Appendix 6B of this ESA) for mitigative measures to be implemented in the event of a sensitive wildlife species or 
habitat discovery, and Section 9.0 of this ESA for additional information on supplemental wildlife and wildlife habitat field studies to be undertaken 
prior to construction. 

 2 Setback distances and timing restrictions based on Alberta Fish and Wildlife Division 2001. Recommended Land Use Guidelines for Protection of 
Selected Wildlife Species and Habitat Within Grassland and Parkland Natural Regions of Alberta. July 26, 2001. Draft. 

 3 Setback distances and timing restrictions based on SK CDC 2003. Saskatchewan Activity Restriction Guidelines for sensitive species in natural 
habitats. September 2003.  

 4 Species specific guidelines are not available for southern Manitoba (Chranowski, Moran pers. comm.). Setback distances and timing restrictions 
based on Environment Canada guidelines for the prairie provinces (Gregoire pers. comm.) and Development of Standardized Guidelines for 
Petroleum Industry Activities that Affect COSEWIC Prairie and Northern Region Vertebrate Species at Risk (Scobie and Faminow 2000). 

 5 Setback distances and timing restrictions based on Scobie, D. and C. Faminow. 2000. Development of Standardized Guidelines for Petroleum 
Industry Activities that Affect COSEWIC Prairie and Northern Region Vertebrate Species at Risk. Prepared for Environment Canada. March 2000. 

 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-107 
 
 

TABLE 6.5 
 

LOCATIONS OF EXTENSIVE TRACTS OF NATIVE VEGETATION, LARGE WATERCOURSES AND 
OPEN WATER ALONG THE PROPOSED PIPELINE ROUTE 

KP Location Land Use Length (m) 
ALBERTA 
KP 176.1 to KP 176.9  Bush-pasture > 500 
KP 176.9 to KP 177.4  Pasture 500 
KP 177.4 to KP 178.5  Bush-pasture > 500 
KP 179.9 to KP 180.3  Pasture < 500 
KP 182.2 to KP 183.6  Bush-pasture > 500 
KP 187.3 to KP 188.3  Pasture > 500 
KP 190.2 to KP 190.9  Pasture > 500 
KP 190.9 to KP 194.1  Bush-pasture > 500 
KP 194.1 to KP 194.9  Pasture > 500 
KP 195.7 to KP 199.1  Bush-pasture > 500 
KP 202.7 to KP 203.2  Bush-pasture 500 
KP 212.4 to KP 213.3 Active sharp-tailed grouse dancing ground  > 500 
KP 212.9 to KP 213.3  Pasture < 500 
KP 213.6 to KP 213.7 Ribstone Creek Hay N/A 
KP 213.9 to KP 217.8  Pasture > 500 
KP 217.8 to KP 225.0  White-tailed deer Wildlife Key Area   > 500 
KP 217.8 to KP 225.9  Pasture and Bush-pasture > 500 
KP 225.0 to KP 226.0 Active sharp-tailed grouse dancing ground   > 500 
KP 226.2 to KP 227.1  Pasture > 500 
KP 226.6 to KP 227.5 Active sharp-tailed grouse dancing ground   > 500 
KP 227.3 to KP 228.1  Pasture > 500 
KP 227.5 to KP 229.5 White-tailed deer Wildlife Key Area   > 500 
KP 228.1 to KP 229.6  Bush-pasture > 500 
KP 229.9 to KP 230.5  Bush-pasture > 500 
KP 234.5 to KP 237.1  Bush-pasture > 500 
KP 237.1 to KP 238.2  Pasture > 500 
KP 242.8 to KP 243.1  Open water  
KP 252.5 to KP 253.3  Pasture > 500 
KP 271.6 to KP 274.8 Eyehill Creek Native prairie > 500 
SASKATCHEWAN    
KP 275.6 to KP 276.1  Native Prairie 500 
KP 276.3 to KP 276.9  Native Prairie > 500 
KP 278.3 to KP 279.0  Native Prairie > 500 
KP 288.1 to KP 288.6  Pasture 500 
KP 300.9 to KP 301.5 Eared grebe nesting colony  > 500 
KP 315.5 to KP 316.0  Bush-pasture 500 
KP 324.5 to KP 332.2  Native prairie > 500 
KP 324.8 to KP 326.0 Sharp-tailed grouse critical wildlife habitat   > 500 
KP 324.9 to KP 325.6 Burrowing owl nesting area   > 500 
KP 328.3 to KP 331.3 Sharp-tailed grouse critical wildlife habitat  > 500 
KP 331.3 to KP 332.2  Native prairie > 500 
KP 331.5 to KP 333.2 Sharp-tailed grouse critical wildlife habitat   > 500 
KP 333.3 to KP 334.0  Native prairie > 500 
KP 334.9 to KP 335.9  Pasture > 500 
KP 335.9 to KP 336.7  Native prairie > 500 
KP 347.2 to KP 348.8  Native prairie > 500 
KP 350.4 to KP 351.2  Pasture > 500 
KP 358.8 to KP 359.8  Native prairie > 500 
KP 382.9 to KP 383.4 Unnamed creek Native prairie < 500 
KP 384.8 to KP 384.9 Unnamed creek Native prairie < 500 
KP 392.5 to KP 392.9  Native prairie < 500 
 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-108 
 
 

TABLE 6.5  Cont'd 

KP Location Land Use Length (m) 
KP 392.9 to KP 394.2 Eagle Creek Pasture > 500 
KP 394.2 to KP 394.5  Native prairie < 500 
KP 414.0 to KP 415.0  Pasture > 500 
KP 424.5 to KP 426.2 Eagle Creek Native prairie > 500 
KP 504.2 to KP 504.8  Pasture > 500 
KP 504.8 to KP 505.2  Native prairie < 500 
KP 505.2 to KP 505.9 South Saskatchewan River River > 500 
KP 505.9 to KP 507.2 Mule deer, white-tailed deer and sharp-tailed grouse critical 

wildlife habitat 
 > 500 

KP 505.9 to KP 508.9  Native prairie > 500 
KP 509.7 to KP 510.5  Pasture > 500 
KP 511.3 to KP 512.2 Mule deer, white-tailed deer and sharp-tailed grouse critical 

wildlife habitat  
 > 500 

KP 556.5 to KP 557.5  Pasture > 500 
KP 559.4 to KP 566.2  Native prairie > 500 
KP 560.5 to KP 562.4 Long-billed curlew nesting habitat   > 500 
KP 563.3 to KP 564.9 Sharp-tailed grouse critical wildlife habitat   > 500 
KP 564.9 to KP 565.3 Long-billed curlew nesting habitat  > 500 
KP 565.9 to KP 567.6 White-tailed deer and sharp-tailed grouse critical wildlife habitat   > 500 
KP 566.7 to KP 567.3  Pasture > 500 
KP 575.2 to KP 577.2  Native prairie > 500 
KP 586.3 to KP 587.5 White-tailed deer, mule deer, pheasant and sharp-tailed grouse 

critical wildlife habitat  
 > 500 

KP 586.3 to KP 590.8 Iskwao Creek Native prairie  > 500 
KP 593.9 to KP 594.5  Pasture > 500 
KP 595.0 to KP 595.4  Pasture < 500 
KP 595.8 to KP 598.3   Pasture > 500 
KP 616.6 to KP 617.5  Pasture > 500 
KP 619.7 to KP 620.2  Native prairie 500 
KP 622.3 to KP 622.9  Native prairie > 500 
KP 624.0 to KP 625.6  Native prairie > 500 
KP 627.1 to KP 628.2  Native prairie > 500 
KP 648.4 to KP 649.4  Native prairie > 500 
KP 653.2 to KP 654.4  Native prairie > 500 
KP 655.9 to KP 656.5  Native prairie > 500 
KP 656.1 to KP 658.5 Beaver critical wildlife habitat   > 500 
KP 656.5 to KP 657.0  Pasture 500 
KP 657.0 to KP 657.1 Qu'Appelle River River  
KP 657.1 to KP 657.4  Pasture < 500 
KP 657.7 to KP 660.1  Native prairie > 500 
KP 662.2 to KP 664.0 Sharp-tailed grouse critical wildlife habitat  > 500 
KP 662.6 to KP 664.0  Native prairie > 500 
KP 663.0 to KP 664.0 White-tailed deer critical wildlife habitat   > 500 
KP 666.8 to KP 667.1 High Hill Creek Native prairie < 500 
KP 669.8 to KP 670.8  Pasture > 500 
KP 774.5 to KP 775.7  Pasture > 500 
KP 781.5 to KP 783.1  Native prairie > 500 
KP 781.7 to KP 784.2 Sharp-tailed grouse critical wildlife habitat   > 500 
KP 783.1 to KP 783.4 DU - Chapleau Lakes Lake  
KP 783.4 to KP 784.6 DU - Chapleau Lakes (KP 783.4-783.8) Native prairie > 500 
KP 784.6 to KP 786.3  Pasture > 500 
KP 804.4 to KP 804.5  Open water  
KP 812.6 to KP 813.2  Pasture > 500 
KP 820.0 to KP 820.4 Unnamed creek Native prairie < 500 
KP 822.5 to KP 823.8 White-tailed deer critical wildlife habitat  > 500 
KP 822.5 to KP 823.8  Bush-pasture > 500 
KP 829.0 to KP 829.6  Pasture > 500 
KP 830.3 to KP 831.0  Pasture > 500 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-109 
 
 

TABLE 6.5  Cont'd 

KP Location Land Use Length (m) 
KP 831.1 to KP 831.3  Open water  
KP 840.3 to KP 841.8 White-tailed deer critical wildlife habitat  > 500 
KP 857.9 to KP 858.4  Open water  
KP 861.6 to KP 863.4  Pasture > 500 
KP 864.2 to KP 864.8  Pasture > 500 
KP 871.2 to KP 871.6 Montgomery Creek Native prairie < 500 
KP 872.7 to KP 873.3 Unnamed Creek Native prairie > 500 
KP 877.7 to KP 879.4  Bush-pasture > 500 
KP 882.0 to KP 883.5  Pasture > 500 
KP 884.3 to KP 884.8  Pasture 500 
KP 884.8 to KP 885.5  Bush-pasture > 500 
KP 887.0 to KP 887.2  Open water  
KP 889.8 to KP 890.7  Bush-pasture > 500 
KP 891.5 to KP 891.6 Charles Lake (250 m south of proposed route) Hay N/A 
KP 895.1 to KP 897.0 White-tailed deer critical wildlife habitat  > 500 
KP 895.1 to KP 895.4  Pasture < 500 
KP 895.4 to KP 897.0  Bush-pasture > 500 
KP 897.4 to KP 897.9  Bush-pasture 500 
KP 898.4 to KP 901.3 White-tailed deer and ruffed grouse critical wildlife habitat  > 500 
KP 898.4 to KP 899.4  Bush-pasture > 500 
KP 899.4 to KP 900.0  Pasture > 500 
KP 900.0 to KP 901.3  Bush-pasture > 500 
KP 906.5 to KP 906.9 White-tailed deer and beaver critical wildlife habitat   < 500 
KP 906.5 to KP 907.7 Little Pipestone Creek Native prairie > 500 
KP 906.9 to KP 909.2 Sharp-tailed grouse critical wildlife habitat   > 500 
KP 907.7 to KP 908.9  Pasture > 500 
KP 913.6 to KP 915.4  Pasture > 500 
KP 916.4 to KP 917.7  Pasture > 500 
KP 917.4 to KP 917.7 White-tailed deer critical wildlife habitat  < 500 
KP 921.2 to KP 922.1  Bush-pasture > 500 
KP 923.1 to KP 923.7  Pasture  > 500 
KP 925.8 to KP 927.4  Bush-pasture > 500 
KP 928.0 to KP 928.5  Bush-pasture 500 
KP 932.1 to KP 933.8 Jackson Creek  Bush-pasture > 500 
KP 936.4 to KP 937.1  Bush > 500 
KP 938.6 to KP 939.3  Pasture > 500 
KP 940.0 to KP 944.9 Sharp-tailed grouse critical wildlife habitat  > 500 
KP 941.5 to KP 942.4  Bush-pasture > 500 
KP 942.4 to KP 943.2 Stony Creek Native prairie > 500 
KP 943.5 to KP 944.2  Native prairie > 500 
KP 944.5 to KP 944.9  Bush-pasture < 500 
MANITOBA    
KP 951.0 to KP 951.6 Pipestone Creek Native Prairie > 500 
KP 951.6 to KP 951.8  Pasture < 500 
KP 952.3 to KP 953.8  Pasture > 500 
KP 955.2 to KP 955.8  Native prairie > 500 
KP 964.0 to KP 964.8  Pasture > 500 
KP 974.0 to KP 974.2  Open water  
KP 974.5 to KP 974.6  Open water  
KP 984.2 to KP 985.3  Pasture > 500 
KP 985.3 to KP 985.7  Native prairie < 500 
KP 988.2 to KP 1004.9 Canada goose refuge critical wildlife habitat  > 500 
KP 988.2 to KP 993.0  Native prairie > 500 
KP 993.6 to KP 993.7 Oak Lake (200 m south of proposed route) Hay N/A 
KP 993.9 to KP 994.7  Pasture > 500 
KP 997.2 to KP 997.4  Bush-pasture < 500 
KP 998.0 to KP 999.7  Bush-pasture > 500 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-110 
 
 

TABLE 6.5  Cont'd 

KP Location Land Use Length (m) 
KP 1000.0 to KP 1001.3  Bush-pasture > 500 
KP 1000.1 to KP 1000.6 Plum Lakes (1 km south of proposed route) Pasture 500 
KP 1000.6 to KP 1001.3  Bush-pasture > 500 
KP 1002.3 to KP 1003.1  Bush-pasture > 500 
KP 1003.1 to KP 1003.8  Native prairie > 500 
KP 1004.3 to KP 1004.5  Pasture < 500 
KP 1004.5 to KP 1004.9  Native prairie < 500 
KP 1004.9 to KP 1005.2  Bush-pasture < 500 
KP 1005.4 to KP 1006.0  Native prairie > 500 
KP 1006.6 to KP 1007.4  Native prairie > 500 
KP 1007.4 to KP 1007.8  Pasture < 500 
KP 1008.9 to KP 1011.8  Bush > 500 
KP 1012.9 to KP 1013.3  Bush-pasture < 500 
KP 1013.3 to KP 1015.4  Native prairie > 500 
KP 1015.4 to KP 1017.1  Pasture > 500 
KP 1019.2 to KP 1020.0  Pasture > 500 
KP 1020.0 to KP 1080.8  Native prairie > 500 
KP 1020.8 to KP 1022.5  Bush-pasture > 500 
KP 1023.4 to KP 1024.0  Pasture > 500 
KP 1024.2 to KP 1025.1  Bush-pasture > 500 
KP 1025.4 to KP 1025.9  Pasture 500 
KP 1029.1 to KP 1030.1  Bush > 500 
KP 1030.1 to KP 1030.7  Native prairie > 500 
KP 1050.1 to KP 1050.6  Pasture 500 
KP 1050.6 to KP 1050.7  Open water  
KP 1050.7 to KP 1051.2  Native prairie 500 
KP 1051.6 to KP 1052.1  Bush  500 
KP 1052.5 to KP 1052.6  Open water  
KP 1052.9 to KP 1053.7 DU - Log Cabins (NW & NE 34-7-19 WPM) 

Kozak and Rouire CA 
(NW 34-7-19 WPM) 

Bush, bush-pasture, pasture > 500 

KP 1056.3 to KP 1057.0 Cunningham CA 
(SW 36-7-19 WPM) 

Pasture < 500 

KP 1072.6 to KP 1074.2 Souris River Bush > 500 
KP 1086.8 to KP 1087.2  Bush-pasture < 500 
KP 1108.0 to KP 1108.4  Pasture < 500 
KP 1109.1 to KP 1111.0 Oak Creek Pasture > 500 
KP 1112.6 to KP 1113.3  Pasture > 500 
KP 1124.5 to KP 1125.0  Pasture 500 
KP 1131.4 to KP 1131.8 Cypress River Bush-pasture < 500 
KP 1132.3 to KP 1132.8  Bush 500 
KP 1153.4 to KP 1154.4  Pasture > 500 
KP 1156.4 to KP 1157.0  Pasture > 500 
KP 1160.6 to KP 1161.0  Native prairie < 500 
KP 1172.6 to KP 1173.0  Bush < 500 
KP 1174.3 to KP 1174.8 DU - Lizard Lake (SW 6-4-7 WPM, 400 m north of proposed 

route) 
N/A N/A 

KP 1182.3 to KP 1182.7  Pasture < 500 
KP 1185.9 to KP 1186.4  Bush-pasture 500 
KP 1190.4 to KP 1191.9  Pasture > 500 
KP 1193.4 to KP 1195.8  Pasture > 500 
KP 1196.2 to KP 1197.0 Deadhorse Creek; 

Lake Minnewasta (200 m south of proposed route) 
Bush-pasture > 500 

Note: Land use along the Regina, Kipling and Morden reroutes will be evaluated during supplemental studies conducted in spring 2007, and are 
excluded from this table. 



 

P
age 6-111 

TABLE 6.6 
 

SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF ADVERSE RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF IDENTIFIED BIOPHYSICAL 
AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC ELEMENTS OF THE PIPELINE AND ASSOCIATED PIPELINE FACILITIES 

Temporal Context 

Adverse Residual Effects Im
pa

ct
 B

al
an

ce
 

Sp
at

ia
l C

on
te

xt
 

Du
ra

tio
n 

Fr
eq

ue
nc

y 

Re
ve

rs
ib

ili
ty

 

M
ag

ni
tu

de
 

Pr
ob

ab
ili

ty
 

Co
nf

id
en

ce
 

Si
gn

ifi
ca

nc
e1

 

1. PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT          
1(a) Areas of minor terrain instabilities may occur. negative footprint short-term isolated short-term low high high not 

significant 
1(b) Topography may be altered at locations where cut slopes are too steep to be 

replaced. 
negative footprint short-term isolated permanent low high moderate not 

significant 
Physical Environment Summary Residual effect summary assessment of all 

components of Physical Environment. 
negative footprint  short-term isolated  short-term to 

permanent 
low high moderate to 

high 
not 

significant 
2. SOIL CAPABILITY          
2(a) Minor topsoil / subsoil mixing. negative footprint short-term isolated medium-term low high high not 

significant 
2(b) Undesirable lower subsoils may be unexpectedly encountered and admixed with 

upper subsoil horizons. 
negative footprint short-term isolated medium- to long-

term 
low high high not 

significant 
2(c) Minor surface erosion of topsoil can be expected until a vegetative cover has 

been established. 
negative footprint short-term isolated short- to long-

term 
low high high not 

significant 
2(d) Revegetation of some disturbed high wind erodible soils may be difficult (e.g., 

soils within the Sounding Dunes, Elbow PFRA Community Pasture, Oak Lake 
Sand Hills and Souris Sand Hills). 

negative  footprint short-term isolated medium- to long-
term 

medium high high not 
significant 

2(e) Revegetation of soils saline to the surface may be difficult. negative footprint short-term isolated short-term low high high not 
significant 

2(f) Stone picking and bedrock slab removal may result in disposal issues and the 
use of sand as bedding and padding material may result in reduced capability of 
soils adjacent to the trench. 

negative footprint to 
region 

short-term isolated short-term low high high not 
significant 

2(g) Pulverization resulting in fugitive dust and loss of soil structure can be expected 
during dry conditions. 

negative footprint short-term isolated short- to 
medium-term 

low low to 
high 

high not 
significant 

2(h) Minor trench subsidence or a remnant crown may occur. negative footprint short-term isolated short- to 
medium-term 

low high high not 
significant 

Soil Capability Summary Residual effect summary assessment of all components of 
Soil Capability. 

negative footprint to 
region 

short-term isolated short- to long-
term 

low to medium low to 
high 

high not 
significant 

3. WATER QUALITY AND QUANTITY          
3(a) Alteration of natural drainage patterns may occur until trench settlement is 

complete. 
negative footprint to 

local 
short-term isolated short-term low to medium high high not 

significant 
3(b) Reduction in surface water quality due to suspended solids during an isolated 

crossing. 
negative footprint to 

local 
short-term isolated immediate to 

short-term 
low to medium high high not 

significant 
3(c) Reduction in surface water quality due suspended solids during a trenched 

crossing with flowing water. 
negative footprint to 

local 
short-term isolated short-term medium to 

high 
high high not 

significant 
3(d) Disruption of water well flows may occur. negative local short-term isolated short-term low low high not 

significant 
3(e) Disruption of shallow groundwater flow where springs are encountered. negative local short-term isolated short-term low low high not 

significant 
 



 

P
age 6-112 

TABLE 6.6  Cont'd 

Temporal Context 

Adverse Residual Effects Im
pa

ct
 B

al
an

ce
 

Sp
at

ia
l C

on
te

xt
 

Du
ra

tio
n 

Fr
eq

ue
nc

y 

Re
ve

rs
ib

ili
ty

 

M
ag

ni
tu

de
 

Pr
ob

ab
ili

ty
 

Co
nf

id
en

ce
 

Si
gn

ifi
ca

nc
e1

 

Water Quality and Quantity Summary Residual effect summary assessment of all 
components of Water Quality and Quantity. 

negative footprint to 
local 

short-term isolated immediate to 
short-term 

low to high low to 
high 

high not 
significant 

4. GREENHOUSE GASES AND AIR QUALITY          
4(a) Increase in vehicle emissions will occur during pipeline construction. negative footprint to 

region 
short-term isolated short-term low high high not 

significant 
4(b) Increase in dust arising from construction traffic on the right-of-way will occur. negative footprint to 

local 
short-term isolated immediate low high high not 

significant 
4(c) Increase in smoke arising from burning of slash will occur. negative footprint to 

local 
short-term isolated immediate low high high not 

significant 
4(d) Slight rise in air emissions will occur during site-specific maintenance activities. negative footprint to 

region 
immediate to 

short-term 
periodic short-term negligible to 

low 
high high not 

significant 
Greenhouse Gases and Air Quality Summary Residual effect summary assessment 

of all components of Greenhouse Gases and Air Quality. 
negative footprint to 

region 
immediate to 

short-term 
isolated to 
periodic 

immediate to 
short-term 

negligible to 
low 

high high not 
significant 

5. ACOUSTIC ENVIRONMENT          
5(a) Increase in noise will occur during pipeline construction. negative footprint to 

local 
short-term isolated immediate low high high not 

significant 
5(b) Slight rise in noise levels during site-specific pipeline maintenance activities. negative footprint to 

local 
immediate to 

short-term 
periodic immediate negligible to 

low 
high high not 

significant 
Acoustic Environment Summary Residual effect summary assessment of all 

components of Acoustic Environment. 
negative footprint to 

local 
immediate to 

short-term 
isolated to 
periodic 

immediate negligible to 
low 

high high not 
significant 

6. FISH AND FISH HABITAT          
6(a) Disturbance of riparian vegetation along the right-of-way and temporary 

workspace. 
negative footprint short-term isolated medium-term low high high not 

significant 
6(b) Alteration of instream habitat within the zone-of-influence at trenched crossings 

will occur. 
negative  footprint to 

local 
short-term isolated short- to 

medium-term 
low high high not 

significant 
6(c) Increased suspended solids during an isolated crossing. negative footprint to 

local 
short-term isolated immediate to 

short-term 
low to medium high high not 

significant 
6(d) Increase in suspended solids during a trenched crossing with flowing water. negative footprint to 

local 
short-term isolated short-term medium to 

high 
high high not 

significant 
6(e) Blockage of fish movement may occur. negative footprint to 

local 
short-term isolated short-term low low high not 

significant 
6(f) Potential for increased fish and bivalve mortality during trenched crossing with 

flowing water. 
negative footprint to 

local 
short-term isolated short-term low low moderate not 

significant 
6(g) Contamination from spills during construction and operations may occur. negative footprint to 

local 
short-term accidental short-term low to high low high not 

significant 
6(h) Potential fish and bivalve species of concern (i.e., chestnut lamprey, maple leaf 

mussel, bigmouth buffalo) may be affected by increased suspended solid 
concentration and habitat alteration within the zone of influence at select 
watercourse crossings. 

negative footprint to 
local 

short-term isolated short- to 
medium-term 

low low high not 
significant 



 

P
age 6-113 

TABLE 6.6  Cont'd 

Temporal Context 

Adverse Residual Effects Im
pa

ct
 B

al
an

ce
 

Sp
at

ia
l C

on
te

xt
 

Du
ra

tio
n 

Fr
eq

ue
nc

y 

Re
ve

rs
ib

ili
ty

 

M
ag

ni
tu

de
 

Pr
ob

ab
ili

ty
 

Co
nf

id
en

ce
 

Si
gn

ifi
ca

nc
e1

 

Fish and Fish Habitat Summary2 Residual effect summary assessment of all 
components of Fish and Fish Habitat. 

negative footprint to 
local 

short-term isolated to 
accidental 

immediate to 
medium-term 

low to high low to 
high 

moderate to 
high 

not 
significant 

7. WETLANDS          
7(a) Alteration of wetland habitat following disturbance.  negative footprint to 

local 
short-term isolated short-term low high high not 

significant 
7(b) Alteration of hydrologic function of wetlands during pipeline construction. negative footprint to 

local 
short-term isolated short-term low high high not 

significant 
7(c) Alteration of water quality function of wetlands during pipeline construction. negative footprint to 

local 
short-term isolated short-term low high high not 

significant 
Wetlands Summary Residual effect summary assessment of all components of 

Wetlands. 
negative footprint to 

local 
short-term isolated short-term low high high not 

significant 
8. VEGETATION          
8(a) Alteration of approximately 390 ha of native vegetation, including 220 ha of 

native prairie. 
negative  footprint short-term isolated medium- to long-

term 
low to medium high high not 

significant 
8(b) If mitigative measures do not completely protect the site, some loss or alteration 

of the local population of S1, S2, or S3 rare vascular plants may occur. 
negative footprint to 

local 
short-term isolated short- to 

medium-term 
medium high moderate not 

significant 
8(c) If the sensitive plant community cannot be avoided, then a narrow strip of the 

community will be disturbed resulting in some loss or alteration of the 
community. 

negative footprint to 
local 

short-term isolated medium- to long-
term 

medium low moderate not 
significant 

8(d) Alteration of approximately 607 ha of vegetation important to wildlife. negative  footprint short-term isolated short- to long-
term 

low high high not 
significant 

8(e) Weed introduction and spread may occur. negative footprint to 
local 

short-term isolated short- to 
medium-term 

low high high not 
significant 

Vegetation Summary Residual effect summary assessment of all components of 
Vegetation. 

negative footprint to 
local 

short-term isolated short- to long-
term 

low to medium low to 
high 

moderate to 
high 

not 
significant 

9. WILDLIFE AND WILDLIFE HABITAT          
9(a) Alteration of approximately 607 ha of wildlife habitat including habitat within 

Ducks Unlimited project areas, Conservation Agreements, NAWMP priority 
areas, PFRA community pastures, WHPA lands, Kendal Game Preserve, and 
Fish and Game Development Fund areas. 

negative  footprint short-term isolated short- to long-
term 

low high high not 
significant 

9(b) Displacement of wildlife away from the pipeline area during construction with 
resultant use of potentially suboptimal habitat during noncritical periods. 

negative footprint to 
local 

short-term isolated short-term low high high not 
significant 

9(c) Potential increase in mortality due to vehicle/wildlife collisions and undiscovered 
nests or dens during construction.  

negative footprint to 
region 

short-term isolated short-term low low high not 
significant 

Wildlife and Wildlife Habitat Summary Residual effect summary assessment of all 
components of Wildlife and Wildlife Habitat. 

negative footprint to 
region 

short-term isolated short- to long-
term 

low low to 
high 

high not 
significant 

10. SPECIES AT RISK          
10(a) Potential fish species at risk may be affected by increased suspended solid 

concentration and habitat alteration within the zone of influence at select 
watercourse crossings. 

negative footprint to 
local 

short-term isolated short- to 
medium-term 

low low high not 
significant 

10(b) If mitigative measures do not completely protect the site, some loss or 
alteration of the local population of vascular plant species at risk may occur. 

negative footprint to 
local 

short-term isolated short- to 
medium-term 

medium low moderate not 
significant 



 

P
age 6-114 

TABLE 6.6  Cont'd 

Temporal Context 

Adverse Residual Effects Im
pa

ct
 B

al
an

ce
 

Sp
at

ia
l C

on
te

xt
 

Du
ra

tio
n 

Fr
eq

ue
nc

y 

Re
ve

rs
ib

ili
ty

 

M
ag

ni
tu

de
 

Pr
ob

ab
ili

ty
 

Co
nf

id
en

ce
 

Si
gn

ifi
ca

nc
e1

 

10(c) Combined effects on wildlife species at risk, including northern leopard frogs, 
loggerhead shrikes, long-billed curlews and burrowing owls. 

negative footprint to 
local 

short-term isolated short- to 
medium-term 

low to medium high moderate not 
significant 

Species at Risk Summary Residual effect summary assessment of all components of 
Species at Risk. 

negative footprint to 
local 

short-term isolated short- to long-
term 

low to medium low to 
high 

moderate to 
high 

not 
significant 

11. HUMAN OCCUPANCY AND RESOURCE USE          
11(a) Disruption of ranching and farming activities, including irrigation, may occur 

during pipeline construction. 
negative footprint to 

local 
short-term isolated short-term low to medium high high  not 

significant 
11(b) Disruption of grazing activities may occur during pipeline construction on 

PFRA / community pasture lands and grazing leases. 
negative footprint to 

local 
short-term isolated short-term low to medium high high  not 

significant 
11(c) Disruption of local hunting and guide outfitting activities may occur during 

pipeline construction. 
negative footprint to 

local 
short-term isolated short-term negligible to 

low 
high high  not 

significant 
11(d) The navigability of watercourses deemed a navigable waterway may be 

affected during pipeline construction. 
negative footprint to 

local 
short-term isolated immediate low high high  not 

significant 
11(e) Disruption of golfing activities may occur during pipeline construction. negative footprint to 

local 
short-term isolated short-term negligible to 

medium 
high high not 

significant 
11(f) Disruption of recreational activities at Kemoca Regional Park may occur 

during pipeline construction. 
negative footprint to 

local 
short-term isolated short-term negligible to 

medium 
high high not 

significant 
11(g) Alteration of lands along the proposed route within the Sounding-Sunken 

Environmentally Significant Area will occur. 
negative footprint short-term isolated medium- to long-

term 
low high high not 

significant 
11(h) A decrease in the quality of the outdoor recreation experience may occur at 

select locations during pipeline construction. 
negative footprint to 

local 
short-term isolated immediate negligible to 

low 
high high  not 

significant 
Human Occupancy and Resource Use Summary Residual effect summary 

assessment of all components of Human Occupancy and Resource Use. 
negative footprint to 

local 
short-term isolated immediate to 

long-term 
negligible to 

medium 
high high  not 

significant 
12. HERITAGE RESOURCES          
12(a) Surface sites may be disturbed during HRIAs and site investigations. negative footprint short-term isolated permanent low high high not 

significant 

12(b) Previously unidentified buried heritage resources may be disturbed during 
pipeline construction. 

negative footprint short-term isolated permanent low low high not 
significant 

Heritage Resources Summary Residual effect summary assessment of all 
components of Heritage Resources. 

negative footprint short-term isolated permanent low low to 
high 

high not 
significant 

13. TRADITIONAL LAND AND RESOURCE USE          
 Disruption of farming activities during pipeline construction on the Swan Lake 

Indian Reserve No. 7 may occur. 
negative footprint to 

local 
short-term isolated short-term low high high  not 

significant 
14. SOCIAL AND CULTURAL WELL-BEING          
 No adverse residual effect identified. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 
15. HUMAN HEALTH          
 No adverse residual effect identified. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 
16. INFRASTRUCTURE AND SERVICES          
16(a) Increased traffic on highways and local roads used to access the proposed 

pipeline right-of-way will occur during pipeline construction. 
negative local to region short-term isolated immediate low high high not 

significant 



 

P
age 6-115 

TABLE 6.6  Cont'd 

Temporal Context 

Adverse Residual Effects Im
pa

ct
 B

al
an

ce
 

Sp
at

ia
l C

on
te

xt
 

Du
ra

tio
n 

Fr
eq

ue
nc

y 

Re
ve

rs
ib

ili
ty

 

M
ag

ni
tu

de
 

Pr
ob

ab
ili

ty
 

Co
nf

id
en

ce
 

Si
gn

ifi
ca

nc
e1

 

16(b) Temporary increase in waste flow to regional landfill sites will occur. negative local to region short-term isolated immediate to 
short-term 

low to medium high high not 
significant 

16(c) Local or regional tourist accommodations along the proposed route  will be 
temporarily occupied by Alberta Clipper Project workers primarily in 
Saskatchewan and Manitoba. 

negative local to region short-term isolated immediate to 
short-term 

low to medium high high not 
significant 

16(d) Despite best intentions and work practices, incidents arising during pipeline 
construction may warrant the use of some emergency services. 

negative local to region short-term isolated immediate low low high not 
significant 

Infrastructure and Services Summary Residual effect summary assessment of all 
components of Infrastructure and Services. 

negative local to region short-term isolated immediate to 
short-term 

low to medium low to 
high 

high not 
significant 

17. EMPLOYMENT AND ECONOMY          
 No adverse residual effect identified. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 

18. ACCIDENTS AND MALFUNCTIONS          
18(a) Spot spills, once remediated, will have little adverse residual effect, although 

other resources could be affected or lost as a result of the accident. 
negative footprint to 

local 
short-term accidental short-term low to high low moderate not 

significant 
18(b) Fires may adversely affect adjacent vegetation and, in very rare situations, 

affect wildlife and adjacent property. 
negative footprint to 

local 
immediate to 

short-term 
accidental short- to long-

term 
low to high low moderate not 

significant 
18(c) Rupture of water, sewage, gas or other lines could lead to interruption of 

services, contamination of soil or water depending on the location and severity 
of the rupture and fires in the case of gas. Cable damage can lead to 
interrupted service of the utility to communities and local residences. 

negative local to region immediate to 
short-term 

accidental immediate to 
short-term 

low to high low moderate not 
significant 

18(d) Depending on the volume and location of the release, a release of drilling mud 
into a watercourse may affect aquatic ecosystems. 

negative footprint to 
local 

short-term accidental short- to 
medium-term 

low to medium low moderate not 
significant 

18(e) A pipeline failure may adversely affect adjacent soils, vegetation, wildlife 
habitat and aquatic ecosystems, including aquifers. 

negative footprint to 
local 

short-term accidental short- to long-
term 

low to high low moderate not 
significant 

Accidents and Malfunctions Summary Residual effect summary assessment of all 
components of Accidents and Malfunctions. 

negative footprint to 
region 

immediate to 
short-term 

accidental immediate to 
long-term 

low to high low moderate not 
significant 

19. EFFECTS OF THE ENVIRONMENT ON THE PROJECT          
19(a) Slumping may affect construction schedule. negative footprint to 

local 
immediate accidental short- to long-

term 
low  low high not 

significant 
19(b) Substantial loss of cover over the pipeline may occur in isolated areas as a 

result of an extreme flood event. 
negative footprint short-term accidental short-term low to high low high not 

significant 
19(c) A wildfire may affect the construction schedule. negative region short-term accidental short-term low low high not 

significant 
Effects of the Environment on the Project Summary Residual effect summary 

assessment of all components of the Effects of the Environment on the Project. 
negative footprint to 

region 
immediate to 

short-term 
accidental short- to long-

term 
low to high low high not 

significant 

Notes:  1. Significant Adverse Residual Effect: A high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically mitigated or economically compensated. 
 2.  The evaluation of significance has included compensation considerations. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-116 
 
 

TABLE 6.7 
 

ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF THE ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 
(in 2007 Canadian Dollars x 1,000, except for Employment in Person-Years) 

Ontario Manitoba Saskatchewan Alberta Total

Estimated Direct Project Expenditures: 56,500 206,440 917,420 309,990 1,490,350

Output:
   Direct 51,764 162,661 605,724 375,541 1,195,690
   Indirect 248,301 102,552 248,676 376,523 976,052
   Total 300,065 265,213 854,400 752,064 2,171,743

Gross Domestic Product (GDP):
   Direct 25,162 50,281 120,970 122,651 319,065
   Indirect 111,626 53,742 130,195 197,542 493,104
   Total 136,788 104,023 251,165 320,193 812,169

Employment (in Person-Years):
   Direct 399 760 2,499 1,810 5,468
   Indirect 1,466 965 1,807 2,121 6,359
   Total 1,866 1,725 4,306 3,931 11,827

Labour Income:
   Direct 17,680 28,671 106,179 97,855 250,386
   Indirect 73,030 38,547 80,805 110,439 302,821
   Total 90,710 67,219 186,984 208,294 553,207

Federal Taxes:
   Corporate Income Tax 9,130 5,242 10,782 22,997 48,153
   Personal Income Tax 10,141 7,515 20,905 23,287 61,848
   GST 284 3,319 12,494 3,512 19,610
   Other Indirect Taxes 439 2,606 7,433 2,334 12,811
   Total 19,995 18,682 51,614 52,131 142,422

Provincial Taxes:
   Corporate Income Tax 5,784 3,440 6,831 10,406 26,460
   Personal Income Tax 4,218 4,611 12,353 10,585 31,767
   PST 2,900 4,119 31,058 472 38,548
   Other Indirect Taxes 715 3,501 14,495 2,363 21,074
   Total 13,617 15,671 64,736 23,826 117,849

Municipal Taxes (Annual from 2010): 0 1,600 2,900 1,800 6,300

Sources:
Estimated Direct Project Expenditures Enbridge
Gross Output Statistics Canada
Gross Domestic Product Statistics Canada
Employment Statistics Canada
Labour Income Statistics Canada
Federal Taxes Statistics Canada, Decision Economics Consulting Group
Provincial Taxes Statistics Canada, Decision Economics Consulting Group
Municipal Taxes Enbridge

 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-117 
 
 

TABLE 6.8 
 

ELEMENTS NOT INTERACTING WITH PUMP ADDITIONS COMPONENT 
OF THE ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

Element Justification 
BIOLOGICAL  
Fish and Fish Habitat Pump additions will not be undertaken within 30 m of a waterbody supporting fish habitat. Therefore, no interaction between 

fish and fish habitat and pump additions is anticipated. 
SOCIAL  
Heritage Resources There are no archaeological concerns associated with the existing pump stations/terminals. In addition, the new Rowatt Pump 

Station will be constructed on previously disturbed cultivated lands with low potential for heritage resources. Therefore, no 
interaction between heritage resources and pump additions is anticipated. 

Traditional Land and 
Resource Use 

Lands at each existing pump station/terminal have been used as industrial lands for decades while lands at the new Rowatt 
Pump Station have been under cultivation for years. The pump additions will not affect any traditional use of the lands at these 
sites. 

Social and Cultural Well-Being The pump additions of the Alberta Clipper Project will entail a comparatively small workforce using the services of local 
communities over a short period. Consequently, the following potential social and cultural well-being impacts noted on 
Table A-5 of the NEB Filing Manual do not apply to these components of the Project:  
• stresses on family and household cohesion;  
• alcohol and substance abuse; or 
• illegal or other potentially disruptive activities. 

This element is discussed under Section 6.2.14 of this ESA for the pipeline. 
Human Health An assessment of nuisance air emissions and noise during construction is provided under GHG and Air Quality and Acoustic 

Environment. Air emissions are not expected to increase during operations of the new pumps. Although noise levels at some 
of the pump stations/terminals may increase during operations of the Alberta Clipper Project, the level of noise emissions 
during operations will comply with regulatory standards. Therefore, no human health effects will be associated with pump 
additions. 

Employment and Economy An economic impact analysis for the Alberta Clipper Project, including pump additions, is discussed under Section 6.2.17 of 
this ESA. 

 

 



 

P
age 6-118 

TABLE 6.9 
 

POTENTIAL BIOPHYSICAL AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC EFFECTS, MITIGATIVE MEASURES 
AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF PUMP ADDITIONS 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential 

Effect 
Pump 

Station(s) 
Project 

Boundary Recommendations / Mitigative Measures1 
EGC/Enbridge Manual 

Reference Residual Effect(s) 
1. PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT    
1(a) Previous site 

contamination 
All Footprint • Notify Enbridge's Safety and Environment department in the event that 

contaminated soils are encountered during ground disturbance activities. 
Enbridge Safety and Environment department will be responsible for 
determining the appropriate course of action using their established guidelines 
on file with the NEB. 

Enbridge O&MPs, Book 3: 
Contaminated Soil Management, 

Section 04-02-024 

• No residual effects identified. 

2. SOIL CAPABILITY 
2(a) Topsoil / subsoil mixing 

during construction 
Rowatt Pump 
Station 

Footprint • Salvage topsoil from all areas to be graded and work areas prior to grading 
and excavation based on the Pre-Disturbance Site Assessment to be 
conducted prior to construction (see Section 9.0 of this ESA).  

• Stockpile topsoil for use during final reclamation of the site upon 
abandonment. Windrow stockpiled topsoil in low berms.  

• Ensure that the locations of the topsoil storage berms are kept on file so that 
topsoil can be replaced upon abandonment of the site. 

EGC 02-5 
EGC 03-3 

• Minor topsoil / subsoil mixing may 
occur at the Rowatt Pump Station. 

2(b) Erosion control of topsoil 
pile during construction 
and operations 

Rowatt Pump 
Station 

Footprint • Do not salvage topsoil material under extremely dry and windy conditions. 
• Store topsoil in low berms. 
• Seed the topsoil storage berms as soon as possible with the following seed 

mix to prevent wind or water erosion of topsoil during operations:  
SPECIES % BY SEED WEIGHT 
northern wheatgrass 40 
creeping red fescue 20 
Canada bluegrass 20 
perennial ryegrass 20 
 
Broadcast at 25-30 kg/ha.  

EGC 02-5 • Given that the proposed mitigative 
measures will ensure that 
agricultural capability of the soil is 
maintained, no residual effect has 
been identified. 

3. WATER QUALITY AND QUANTITY 
3(a) Reduction of groundwater 

quality  
All Footprint to 

Local 
• Enbridge has an existing groundwater monitoring system in place at most of 

the pump stations to monitor groundwater quality and quantity.  
• Ground disturbance associated with the additions at the pump station sites will 

be limited to shallow depths.  

--- • No residual effects identified. 

3(b) Withdrawal and release 
of hydrostatic test water, 
if conducted 

All Local to 
Region 

• In the unlikely event that rental fluids cannot be used and water is withdrawn 
and released for hydrostatic testing, all testing activities will be conducted in 
accordance with the NEB Onshore Pipeline Regulations, provincial 
regulations, codes of practice, as well as the latest version of CSA Z662. 

• Screen and locate test water intakes to prevent the intake of fish and fish 
eggs. 

• Isolate fill pumps from bodies of water with an impermeable lined dike or 
depression to prevent spills of fuels or lubricants from entering a body of 
water. 

EGC 02-18 • No residual effects identified. 

 



 

P
age 6-119 

TABLE 6.9  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential 

Effect 
Pump 

Station(s) 
Project 

Boundary Recommendations / Mitigative Measures1 
EGC/Enbridge Manual 

Reference Residual Effect(s) 
3(b) Withdrawal and release 

of hydrostatic test water, 
if conducted 
(cont'd) 

All Local to 
Region 

• If test water is released into a natural waterbody, ensure that the appropriate 
testing and treatment measures are implemented in accordance with provincial 
regulations related to discharging hydrostatic test water. 

• The withdrawal rate and volume will not exceed 5% of the flow rate of the 
watercourse or of the volume of the body of water unless otherwise approved 
by the appropriate authority.  

• Control the discharge rate of test water to reduce the potential for soil erosion. 
• Install energy diffusers and plywood sheeting, tarpaulins or other similar 

material to reduce the risk of soil erosion. Reduce the discharge rate if erosion 
becomes evident. 

EGC 02-18 • No residual effects identified. 

3(c) Surface runoff Rowatt Pump 
Station 

Footprint  • Install an appropriately-sized berm on the downslope side of the site to control 
surface runoff and to provide containment in the event of a spill. 

--- • Given that the proposed mitigative 
measure will ensure that onsite 
drainage will be controlled and 
offsite natural drainage patterns in 
the vicinity of the site are 
maintained, no residual effect has 
been identified. 

4. GREENHOUSE GASES AND AIR QUALITY    
4(a) Indirect GHG emissions 

during operation of 
pumps 

All Footprint to 
Region 

• Clearstone Engineering Ltd. undertook an assessment of direct and indirect 
GHG emissions associated with the Alberta Clipper Project (see Appendix I of 
this ESA). 

• Minimize the amount of indirect GHG emissions attributed to electrical power 
consumption requirements of new pumps associated with the Alberta Clipper 
Project by installing high efficiency pump motors. 

--- • Indirect GHG emissions will increase 
during operation of new pumps. 

4(b) Airborne emissions from 
equipment during 
construction 

All Footprint to 
Region 

• Use well maintained equipment to minimize emissions.  
• Minimize unnecessary idling of construction equipment. 

EGC 02-2 • Increase in vehicle emissions will 
occur during pump additions and 
construction of the Rowatt Pump 
Station. 

5. ACOUSTIC ENVIRONMENT     
5(a) Noise from construction 

equipment  
All Footprint to 

Local 
• Ensure that noise abatement equipment on machinery is in good working 

order. 
• Equip construction equipment with mufflers. 
• Abide by local noise by-laws where applicable. 

EGC 02-2 • Increase in noise will occur during 
pump additions and construction of 
the new Rowatt Pump Station. 

5(b) Noise during operations  All Footprint to 
Local 

• Stations/terminals will be subject to noise testing prior to being placed in 
service if the stations were not subject to noise surveys as part of the Enbridge 
Southern Access Project. 

• Enbridge is proposing to retain noise measurement specialists to conduct 
noise surveys at all stations/terminals where pump additions occurred and at 
the Rowatt Pump Station. These surveys will be conducted when the stations 
are in-service in order to confirm compliance with Alberta EUB Noise Directive 
038. 

--- • Ambient noise levels at existing 
stations/terminals and at the Rowatt 
Pump Station may increase during 
operations. 

6. WETLANDS   
6(a) Potential sedimentation in 

nearby wetland 
Craik 

Glenavon 
Footprint • Install a temporary sediment barrier (e.g., silt fence) to eliminate the flow of 

sediment from clean spoil piles and disturbed areas into nearby wetland. 
EGC 02-14 • No residual effects identified. 



 

P
age 6-120 

TABLE 6.9  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential 

Effect 
Pump 

Station(s) 
Project 

Boundary Recommendations / Mitigative Measures1 
EGC/Enbridge Manual 

Reference Residual Effect(s) 
7. VEGETATION 
7(a) Revegetation of disturbed 

areas during construction 
Rowatt Pump 

Station 
Footprint • Seed topsoil storage berms with the seed mix in Soil Capability element 2(b) of 

this table as soon as possible. 
• Gravel disturbed areas within the fenced-in station boundary. 

--- • No residual effects identified. 

7(b) Weed introduction during 
construction and 
operations 

Rowatt Pump 
Station 

Footprint to 
Local 

• Employ standard weed control measures such as cleaning equipment prior to 
arrival at the station as described in the EGC. 

• Monitor and control weeds during the operation of the Rowatt Pump Station. 

EGC 02-2 
EGC 02-4 

• Weed introduction and/or spreading 
from disturbance may occur at the 
Rowatt Pump Station. 

8. WILDLIFE AND WILDLIFE HABITAT 
8(a) Auditory or visual 

disturbances of wildlife 
during construction 

All Footprint to 
Local 

• Prohibit personnel from harassing or feeding wildlife or livestock during pump 
modification activities. Pets or firearms will not be permitted at the site. 

EGC 02-2 • Displacement of wildlife away from 
station/terminal during pump 
additions or station construction with 
resultant use of potentially 
suboptimal habitat during noncritical 
conditions. 

8(b) Auditory disturbances of 
wildlife during operations 

All Footprint to 
Local 

• Ensure that noise levels at the stations/terminals are in compliance with 
applicable provincial regulations. 

EGC 01-4 • Increase in noise levels in the 
immediate vicinity of the 
station/terminal will likely displace 
wildlife over the short to long-term. 

8(c) Direct and indirect 
mortality during 
construction 

All Footprint to 
Region 

• Inform contractor that Alberta Clipper Project traffic is to obey all traffic laws. 
• Report encounters or collisions with wildlife to Fish and Wildlife authorities or 

the local police department (see Appendix 6B of this ESA). 
• Collect garbage on a daily basis and dispose of at an approved facility to 

minimize the attraction of wildlife during construction. 

EGC 02-2 • Potential for vehicle/wildlife collisions 
on access routes and at the 
station/terminal. 

9. SPECIES AT RISK      
9(a) Potential disturbance of 

wildlife species at risk in 
vicinity of pump station 

Hardisty 
Kerrobert 

Craik 
Glenavon 
Cromer 

Local • If pump additions at the pump station/terminal are scheduled to be conducted 
during the breeding period, conduct a sweep for wildlife SARA species on 
noncultivated lands within 500 m of the station prior to the initiation of 
activities. Should a SARA species be identified, determine appropriate 
mitigative measures to minimize disturbance in consultation with Environment 
Canada. 

• Breeding periods for potential SARA bird species include: 
 loggerhead shrike:  April 15 - July 15 
 burrowing owl:  April 15 - August 15 
 piping plover:  May 1 - July 31 
 Sprague's pipit:  April 15 - August 31 
 yellow rail:   May 1 to August 15 
 long-billed curlew:  April 15 - July 15 

--- • No residual effects identified. 

10. HUMAN OCCUPANCY AND RESOURCE USE   
10(a) Potential alterations to 

existing viewsheds 
Existing 
stations/ 
terminal 

Footprint to 
Local 

• Installation of new aboveground components (i.e., pump installation) at each 
pump station will be located within the existing pump station site. 

--- • The installation of aboveground 
facilities (i.e., pump installation) will 
form part of the visual landscape at 
the pump station/terminal over the 
long-term. 



 

P
age 6-121 

TABLE 6.9  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential 

Effect 
Pump 

Station(s) 
Project 

Boundary Recommendations / Mitigative Measures1 
EGC/Enbridge Manual 

Reference Residual Effect(s) 
10(a) Potential alterations to 

existing viewsheds 
(cont'd) 

Rowatt Pump 
Station 

Footprint to 
Local 

• The view of the pump station from the nearest residence will be largely 
obstructed by a shelterbelt. 

• Follow measures outlined in Detail 6.1 for creating a vegetative screen along 
each side of the Rowatt Pump Station. 

• The pump station cannot be viewed from a major highway. 
• Minimize light intrusion on areas adjacent to the pump station by reducing the 

number of lights and light intensity as much as practical without compromising 
safety.  

--- • The installation of aboveground 
facilities (i.e., buildings, fences, 
piping) will form part of the visual 
landscape at the Rowatt Pump 
Station over the long-term. 

10(b) Disruption of farming 
activities 

Rowatt Pump 
Station 

Footprint  • Notify local farmer of the Rowatt Pump Station component of the Alberta 
Clipper Project and activity schedule prior to commencement of construction 
activities. 

--- • Local farmer may experience 
disturbances of their activities during 
construction of the Rowatt Pump 
Station. 

11. INFRASTRUCTURE AND SERVICES    
11(a) transport of workers and 

supplies during 
construction 

All Footprint to 
Region 

• Advise all Alberta Clipper-related vehicles to follow applicable traffic, road-use 
and safety laws. 

• The contractor will develop a traffic management plan to manage vehicular 
movements on highways and local roads.  

--- • Increased traffic on highways and 
local roads used to access the pump 
stations/terminals will occur during 
pump additions. 

11(b) Waste management 
during construction 

All Footprint to 
Region 

• Collect waste from work site on a daily basis. 
• Transport and dispose of all wastes in accordance with provincial and federal 

regulatory requirements. 
• Locate temporary toilets at convenient location on the construction site. 
• Follow the measures outlined in Enbridge's Waste Management Plan on file 

with the NEB. 

EGC 02-2 /  
Enbridge Waste Management 

Plan 

• Temporary increase in waste flow to 
regional landfill sites will occur.  

11(c) worker accommodation 
needs may displace 
tourists  

Hardisty 
Terminal 

Local to 
Region 

• Enbridge or its contractor is to install a temporary construction camp to 
accommodate Project workers associated with all components of the Alberta 
Clipper Project in the Hardisty area due to the limited availability of local and 
regional accommodation. 

• Treat sewage and grey water as per municipal and provincial permits. Dispose 
of waste in accordance with municipal and provincial permits as well as the 
Enbridge Waste Management Plan currently on file with the NEB. 

• Obtain approval from the applicable regulatory authority prior to withdrawing 
water from nearby water source for use in the temporary construction camp. 
Otherwise, haul fresh water to camps. 

--- • Some local or regional tourist 
accommodations near Hardisty will 
be temporarily occupied by 
regulatory inspectors and company 
personnel. 

12. ACCIDENTS AND MALFUNCTIONS    
12(a) Spills of hazardous 

materials during 
construction 

All Footprint  • Report spills immediately to the Enbridge Representative and, if warranted, 
appropriate government agencies. 

• Implement Enbridge’s Emergency Response Plan in the event of a spill or leak 
of hydrocarbons.  

EGC 02-2 / 
Enbridge O&MPs, Book 7: 

Emergency Response, Section 
03-02-02 

• Spot spills, once remediated, will 
have little adverse residual effect, 
although other resources could be 
affected or lost as a result of the 
accident.  

12(b) Fire during construction All Footprint • Follow the measures identified within Enbridge's Emergency Response Plan in 
the event of an accidental fire. 

EGC 02-2 /  
Enbridge O&MPs, Book 2: Safety 

Section 05 

• Despite vigilance, fires may 
adversely affect adjacent vegetation, 
and in very rare situations, affect 
wildlife and adjacent property. 

Note: 1 Detailed mitigative measures are outlined in Enbridge's EGC (2003) on file with the NEB. 



 
CRITERIA FOR IMPLEMENTATION: 
 
A vegetation screen will be planted around the perimeter of the Rowatt Pump Station to buffer the pump station from local 
residences.  
 
Notes: 
 
Planting a vegetation screen around the perimeter of the Rowatt Pump Station with native species will involve the following. 
Trembling aspen (Populus tremuloides) and chokecherry (Prunus virginiana) will be planted in an 8 m wide swath in 
the configuration below. All plantings will require weekly waterings for the first month following planting and bi-weekly 
waterings through the balance of the first growing season. Depending on spring and summer soil moisture levels, it is 
suggested that bi-weekly waterings continue into the second growing season.   
 

 
 
Plant species 3.5 m apart from west to east and 4 m apart from north to south - stagger plants in an alternating 
configuration to maximize growing space and available light. Along the north and south side of the pump station, plant 
chokecherry shrubs as shown above on the south side of the swath. Along the east and west sides of the pump 
station, plant chokecherry shrubs as shown above on the west side of the swath.  
 
At the above configuration and spacing, a 200 m linear distance would require approximately: 
-148 Aspen and 42 Chokecherry 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

ROWATT PUMP STATION VEGETATION SCREEN 

 4462 April 2007 Detail 6.1 

 
 



 

P
age 6-123 

TABLE 6.10 
 

SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF ADVERSE RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF IDENTIFIED BIOPHYSICAL 
AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC ELEMENTS OF PUMP ADDITIONS 

Temporal Context 

Adverse Residual Effects Im
pa

ct
 B

al
an

ce
 

Sp
at

ia
l C

on
te

xt
 

Du
ra

tio
n 

Fr
eq

ue
nc

y 

Re
ve

rs
ib

ili
ty

 

M
ag

ni
tu

de
 

Pr
ob

ab
ili

ty
 

Co
nf

id
en

ce
 

Si
gn

ifi
ca

nc
e1

 

1. SOIL CAPABILITY          
 Minor topsoil / subsoil mixing may occur at the Rowatt Pump Station. negative footprint short-term isolated medium to long-

term 
low high high not 

significant 
2. GREENHOUSE GASES AND AIR QUALITY          

2(a) Indirect GHG emissions will increase during operation of new pumps. negative footprint to 
region 

long-term continuous short-term low high high not 
significant 

2(b) Increase in vehicle emissions will occur during pump additions and construction 
of the Rowatt Pump Station. 

negative footprint to 
region 

short-term isolated short-term low high high not 
significant 

Greenhouse Gases and Air Quality Summary - Residual effect summary 
assessment of all components of Greenhouse Gases and Air Quality. 

negative footprint to 
region 

short to long-
term 

isolated to 
continuous 

short-term low high high not 
significant 

3. ACOUSTIC ENVIRONMENT          
3(a) Increase in noise will occur during pump additions and construction of the 

Rowatt Pump Station. 
negative footprint to 

local 
short-term isolated immediate low high high not 

significant 
3(b) Ambient noise levels at existing stations/terminals and at the Rowatt Pump 

Station may increase during operations. 
negative footprint to 

local 
long-term continuous immediate low high high not 

significant 
Acoustic Environment Summary - Residual effect summary assessment of all 
components of Acoustic Environment. 

negative footprint to 
local 

short to long-
term 

isolated to 
continuous 

immediate low high high not 
significant 

4. VEGETATION          
 Weed introduction and/or spreading from disturbance may occur at the Rowatt 

Pump Station. 
negative footprint to 

local 
short-term isolated medium-term low high moderate to 

high 
not 

significant 
5. WILDLIFE AND WILDLIFE HABITAT          
5(a) Displacement of wildlife away from station/terminal during pump additions or 

station construction with resultant use of potentially suboptimal habitat during 
noncritical conditions. 

negative footprint to 
local 

short-term isolated short-term low high high not 
significant 

5(b) Increase in noise levels in the immediate vicinity of the station/terminal will likely 
displace wildlife over the short- to long-term. 

negative footprint to 
local 

long-term continuous short to long-
term 

low high moderate to 
high 

not 
significant 

5(c) Potential for vehicle/wildlife collisions on access routes and at the 
station/terminal. 

negative footprint to 
region 

short-term isolated short-term low low high not 
significant 

Wildlife and Wildlife Habitat Summary- Residual effect summary assessment of all 
components of Wildlife and Wildlife Habitat. 

negative footprint to 
region 

short to long-
term 

isolated to 
continuous 

short to long-
term 

low low to 
high 

moderate to 
high 

not 
significant 

6. HUMAN OCCUPANCY AND RESOURCE USE          
6(a) The installation of aboveground facilities (i.e., pump installation) will form part of 

the visual landscape at the pump station/terminal over the long-term. 
negative  local long-term continuous long-term negligible to 

low  
high high not 

significant 
6(b) The installation of aboveground facilities (i.e., buildings, fences, piping) will form 

part of the visual landscape at the Rowatt Pump Station over the long-term. 
negative  local long-term continuous long-term low  high high not 

significant 
 



 

P
age 6-124 

TABLE 6.10  Cont'd 

Temporal Context 

Adverse Residual Effects Im
pa

ct
 B

al
an

ce
 

Sp
at

ia
l C

on
te

xt
 

Du
ra

tio
n 

Fr
eq

ue
nc

y 

Re
ve

rs
ib

ili
ty

 

M
ag

ni
tu

de
 

Pr
ob

ab
ili

ty
 

Co
nf

id
en

ce
 

Si
gn

ifi
ca

nc
e1

 

6(c) Local farmer may experience disturbances of their activities during construction 
of the Rowatt Pump Station. 

negative footprint short-term isolated short-term low high high not 
significant 

Human Occupancy and Resource Use Summary - Residual effect summary 
assessment of all components of Human Occupancy and Resource Use. 

negative  footprint to 
local 

short to long-
term 

isolated to 
continuous 

short to long-
term 

negligible to 
low  

high high not 
significant 

7. INFRASTRUCTURE AND SERVICES          
7(a) Increased traffic on highways and local roads used to access the pump 

stations/terminals will occur during the pump additions. 
negative footprint to 

region 
short-term isolated short-term low high high not 

significant 
7(b) Temporary increase in waste flow to regional landfill sites will occur.  negative local to region short-term isolated immediate to 

short-term 
low high high not 

significant 
7(c) Some local or regional tourist accommodations near Hardisty will be temporarily 

occupied by regulatory inspectors and company personnel. 
negative local to region short-term isolated immediate to 

short-term 
low high high not 

significant 
Infrastructure and Services Summary - Residual effect summary assessment of all 

components of Infrastructure and Services. 
negative footprint to 

region 
short-term isolated immediate to 

short-term 
low high high not 

significant 
8. ACCIDENTS AND MALFUNCTIONS          
8(a) Spot spills, once remediated, will have little adverse residual effect, although 

other resources could be affected or lost as a result of the accident. 
negative footprint to 

local 
short-term accidental short-term low to high low moderate not 

significant 
8(b) Fires may adversely affect adjacent vegetation and, in very rare situations, affect 

wildlife and adjacent property. 
negative footprint to 

local 
immediate to 

short-term 
accidental short to long-

term 
low to high low moderate not 

significant 
Accidents and Malfunctions Summary - Residual effect summary assessment of all 

components of Accidents and Malfunctions. 
negative footprint to 

local 
immediate to 

short-term 
accidental short to long-

term 
low to high low moderate not 

significant 

Note:  1. Significant Adverse Residual Effect: A high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically mitigated or economically compensated. 
 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6-125 
 
 

TABLE 6.11 
 

ELEMENTS NOT INTERACTING WITH THE HARDISTY TERMINAL TANK INSTALLATION 
COMPONENT OF THE ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

Element Justification 
BIOLOGICAL  
Fish and Fish Habitat The new tanks will not be located within 30 m of a waterbody supporting fish habitat. Therefore, no interaction between fish 

and fish habitat and the tank installation is anticipated. 
Wetlands The new tanks will not be located within 30 m of a wetland. Therefore, no interaction between wetlands and the tank 

installation is anticipated. 
SOCIAL  
Traditional Land and Resource 
Use 

Lands at the Hardisty Terminal where the tanks will be installed are on privately-owned lands that have been used as 
agricultural lands (i.e., pasture and bush-pasture) for years. The tank installation will not affect any traditional use of the 
lands at the terminal. 

Social and Cultural Well-Being The tank installation of the Alberta Clipper Project will entail a comparatively small workforce using the services of local 
communities over a short period. Consequently, the following potential social and cultural well-being impacts noted on 
Table A-5 of the NEB Filing Manual do not apply to these components of the Project: 
• stresses on family and household cohesion;  
• alcohol and substance abuse; or 
• illegal or other potentially disruptive activities. 
This element is discussed under Section 6.2.14 of this ESA for the pipeline. 

Human Health An assessment of nuisance air emissions and noise during construction is provided under Air Quality and Acoustic 
Environment elements. Odours may be released from the tanks during operations and are discussed under Air Quality. 
Although noise levels at the Hardisty Terminal are anticipated to increase during operations, the level of noise emissions 
during operations will comply with regulatory standards. Therefore, no human health effects will be associated with the tank 
component of the Alberta Clipper Project. 

Employment and Economy An economic impact analysis for the Alberta Clipper Project, including the tank component, is discussed under 
Section 6.2.17 of this ESA. 

 



 

P
age 6-126 

TABLE 6.12 
 

POTENTIAL BIOPHYSICAL AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC EFFECTS, MITIGATIVE MEASURES 
AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF TANK INSTALLATION AND OPERATION AT HARDISTY TERMINAL 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential 

Effect Component 
Project 

Boundary Recommendations / Mitigative Measures1 
EGC/Enbridge Manual 

Reference Residual Effect(s) 
1. PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT    
1(a) Previous site 

contamination 
Tanks Footprint • Notify Enbridge's Safety and Environment department in the event that 

contaminated soils are encountered during ground disturbance activities. 
Enbridge Safety and Environment department will be responsible for 
determining the appropriate course of action using their established guidelines 
on file with the NEB. 

Enbridge O&MPs, Book 3: 
Contaminated Soil Management, 

Section 04-02-024 

• No residual effects identified. 

2. SOIL CAPABILITY 
2(a) Topsoil / subsoil mixing 

during construction 
Tanks Footprint • Salvage all available topsoil. A topsoil depth survey will be conducted on the 

facility site prior to construction to ensure that equivalent land capability 
would be maintained in the event that the site is returned to agricultural land 
use at the end of the life of the facility (see Section 9.0 of this ESA).  

• Salvage topsoil from all areas to be graded and work areas prior to grading 
and excavation. 

• Stockpile topsoil for use during final reclamation of the site upon 
abandonment. Windrow stockpiled topsoil in low berms.  

• Ensure that the locations of the topsoil storage berms are kept on file so that 
topsoil can be replaced upon abandonment of the site. 

EGC 02-5 
EGC 03-3 

• Minor topsoil / subsoil mixing may 
occur at the Hardisty Terminal due 
to tank installation. 

2(b) Compaction and rutting 
during construction 

Tanks Footprint  Suspend topsoil handling if excessively wet soil conditions persist and will 
not commence until soils dry out.  Implement the Wet/Thawed Soils 
Contingency Plan in Appendix 6B of this ESA. 

EGC 02-16 • No residual effects identified. 

2(c) Erosion control of topsoil 
pile during construction 
and operations 

Tanks Footprint  Do not salvage topsoil material under extremely dry and windy conditions. 
 Store topsoil in low berms. 
 Seed the topsoil storage berms as soon as possible with the following seed 

mix to prevent  wind or water erosion of topsoil during operations:  
SPECIES % BY SEED WEIGHT 
meadow brome 40 
intermediate wheatgrass 25 
creeping red fescue 15 
orchard grass 10 
alfalfa or cicer milk-vetch 10 
Broadcast at 25-30 kg/ha  

EGC 02-5 • No residual effects identified. 

3. WATER QUALITY AND QUANTITY 
3(a) Interference with natural 

drainage patterns 
Tanks Footprint to 

Local 
• Contour the tank site to direct site-sourced drainage into the runoff 

containment area. 
• Locate the topsoil stockpile sites in upslope positions to avoid disruption of 

natural drainage and drainage channels. 
• Install culvert along the proposed access road to the tanks where deemed 

necessary to maintain drainage patterns. 

--- • No residual effects identified. 

 



 

P
age 6-127 

TABLE 6.12  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential 

Effect Component 
Project 

Boundary Recommendations / Mitigative Measures1 
EGC/Enbridge Manual 

Reference Residual Effect(s) 
3(b) Reduction of surface 

water 
Tanks Footprint to 

Local 
• The tanks will not lie within 30 m of a waterbody. 
• Grade the facility site to ensure that site surface runoff is either contained 

within dikes or directed towards the runoff containment area. 
• Before using equipment near a waterbody, inspect hydraulic, fuel and 

lubrication systems to ensure they are in good condition and free of leaks. 
• Wash equipment or machinery at least 30 m from a waterbody. 
• Store fuel and conduct refuelling at least 30 m from a waterbody except where 

secondary confinement is provided. 
• Install appropriately sized berms to provide containment in the event of a leak. 
• Ensure that the diked areas/runoff containments areas have been sized with a 

capacity to handle a 1 in 100 year storm event with a 24 hr duration period.  
• Test surface runoff collected within diked areas/runoff containment areas to 

ensure satisfactory water quality prior to release. Waters collected within the 
diked areas/runoff containment areas will be released, when warranted, offsite 
after field tested in accordance with EUB Directive 055 requirements to ensure 
the quality of the water meets the following criteria: 

a) chloride content is less than or equal to 500 mg/L (using test strips or 
equal); 
b) pH value is 6.0 to 9.0 (using test strips and/or meter readings); 
c) no hydrocarbon sheen is visible; 
d) no other chemical contamination is present; and 
e) any other criteria associated with the approval of the facility. 

• Release surface runoff from diked areas/runoff containment areas with a 
manually operated valve. 

• Retain, test and where necessary, treat and release water accumulating within 
diked areas/runoff containment areas on site.  

• See also Section 2.0 of this ESA. 

EGC 02-2 • No residual effects identified. 

3(c) Reduction of groundwater 
quality  

Tanks Footprint to 
Local 

• Design and install the proposed storage tanks in compliance with appropriate 
standards (including Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment 
(CCME) Environmental Code of Practice for Aboveground Storage Tank 
Systems Containing Petroleum Products), regulations (e.g., API Standard 650 
reference by CSA Standard Z662), best industry practices and guidelines for 
permanent crude oil tanks. 

• Equip new tanks with an under-tank leak detection system and, to minimize 
corrosion of the tanks, install cathodic protection.  

• Secondary containment will consist of a compacted clay liner or a geosynthetic 
liner which will extend under the tank and up the slope of the containment 
dykes. At the tank, a geo-liner will be placed between the granular base above 
the liner (tank pad) and the liner to prevent granular material from disturbing 
the integrity of the secondary liner. The secondary containment will meet the 
requirements of Alberta EUB Directive 055 Storage Requirements for the 
Upstream Petroleum Industry. 

• Prepare a groundwater monitoring program at the site for the life of the tanks. 
• See also Section 2.0 of this ESA. 

--- • No residual effects identified. 



 

P
age 6-128 

TABLE 6.12  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential 

Effect Component 
Project 

Boundary Recommendations / Mitigative Measures1 
EGC/Enbridge Manual 

Reference Residual Effect(s) 
3(d) Withdrawal and release 

of hydrostatic test water 
Tanks Local to 

Region 
• Utilize water from the hydrostatic testwater pond located in LSD 15-29-42-9 

W4M. Adhere to the requirements of the Alberta Environment Codes of 
Practice related to withdrawing and discharging hydrostatic test water. 

• Screen and locate test water intakes to prevent the intake of fish and fish 
eggs, if warranted. 

• Isolate fill pumps from bodies of water with an impermeable lined dike or 
depression to prevent spills of fuels or lubricants from entering a body of water 
if an alternate natural water source is used. 

• If test water is released into a natural water body, ensure that the appropriate 
testing and treatment measures are implemented in accordance with the 
Alberta Environment Code of Practice related to discharging hydrostatic test 
water. 

• The withdrawal rate and volume will not exceed 5% of the flow rate of the 
watercourse or of the volume of the body of water if an alternate natural water 
source is used unless Alberta Environment is notified.  

• Control the discharge rate of test water to reduce the potential for soil erosion. 
• Install energy diffusers and plywood sheeting, tarpaulins or other similar 

material to reduce the risk of soil erosion. Reduced the discharge rate if 
erosion becomes evident. 

EGC 02-18 • No residual effects identified. 

4. GREENHOUSE GASES AND AIR QUALITY    
4(a) Indirect GHG emissions 

during operation of 
pumps 

Tanks Footprint to 
Region 

• Clearstone Engineering Ltd. conducted an assessment of direct and indirect 
GHG emissions associated with the Alberta Clipper Project, including the tank 
installation component (see Appendix I of this ESA). 

• Minimize the amount of indirect GHG emissions attributed to electrical power 
consumption requirements of new pumps associated with the Alberta Clipper 
Project by installing high efficiency pump motors. 

--- • Indirect GHG emissions will increase 
during operation of new pumps. 

4(b) Airborne emissions from 
equipment during 
construction 

Tanks Footprint to 
Region 

• Use well maintained equipment to minimize emissions.  
• Minimize unnecessary idling of construction equipment. 
• Take reasonable measures to control construction-related dust as directed by 

Enbridge. Control measures for dust may include watering down work area 
and suspending topsoil stripping and replacement during strong winds. 

EGC 02-2 • Increase in vehicle emissions will 
occur during tank installation at the 
Hardisty Terminal. 

4(c) Odorous emissions 
during operations 

Tanks Footprint to 
Local 

• Enbridge will request air quality experts to model anticipated air quality in the 
immediate vicinity of the proposed new tanks at Hardisty in the 2nd quarter of 
2007(see Section 9.0 of this ESA). 

• Design and install the proposed storage tanks in compliance with appropriate 
standards (including CCME Environmental Code of Practice for Aboveground 
Storage Tank Systems Containing Petroleum Products), regulations, best 
industry practices and guidelines for permanent crude oil tanks. 

• Equip new tanks with an external floating roof with primary and secondary rim 
seals as well as guide pole and floating roof leg seals to minimize odorous 
emissions. 

--- • Odours may be emitted from new 
tanks. 



 

P
age 6-129 

TABLE 6.12  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential 

Effect Component 
Project 

Boundary Recommendations / Mitigative Measures1 
EGC/Enbridge Manual 

Reference Residual Effect(s) 
4(c) Odorous emissions 

during operations  
(cont'd) 

see above see above • Application of operating procedures to minimize the landing of the floating roof. 
• Application of good industry practice during the degassing and cleaning of the 

storage tanks. 
• Periodic inspections of the tanks in accordance with CCME and American 

Petroleum Institute (API) requirements. 
• Conduct post-construction headspace emissions monitoring two times per 

year during the operations phase of the tank. 
• Conduct post-construction air emissions monitoring to confirm that air quality 

objectives are met during operation of the tanks. 

--- see above 

5. ACOUSTIC ENVIRONMENT     
5(a) Noise from construction 

equipment  
Tanks Footprint to 

Local 
• Ensure that noise abatement equipment on machinery is in good working 

order. 
• Equip construction equipment with mufflers. 
• Abide by local noise by-laws where applicable. 

EGC 02-2 • Increase in noise will occur during 
tank installation at the Hardisty 
Terminal. 

5(b) Noise during operations  Tanks Footprint to 
Local 

• Enbridge is proposing to retain noise measurement specialists to conduct 
noise surveys at the Hardisty Terminal when the tanks are in-service in order 
to confirm compliance with Alberta EUB Noise Directive 038. 

--- • Ambient noise levels at the Hardisty 
Terminal may increase during 
operations. 

6. VEGETATION 
6(a) Loss of vegetation 

important to wildlife 
Tanks Footprint • A vegetation survey of the site was conducted in 2004 which revealed that a 

portion of the site is dominated by high quality native prairie and parkland (see 
Appendix IV of this ESA). 

• Minimize workspace area.  
• Dispose of slash in accordance with methods outlined in the EGC and 

municipal regulations. Do not burn slash. 

--- • Approximately 17 ha of vegetation 
important to wildlife will be removed 
at the Hardisty Terminal. 

6(b) Revegetation of disturbed 
areas during construction 

Tanks Footprint • Seed topsoil storage berms with the seed mix in Soil Capability element 2(c) of 
this table as soon as possible. 

• Cover disturbed areas with appropriate cover material within the fenced-in tank 
farm boundary. 

 Seed disturbed areas outside of the fenced boundary with the following native 
seed mix:  
SPECIES % BY SEED WEIGHT 
northern wheatgrass 40 
slender/awned wheatgrass 20 
plains rough fescue 15 
june grass 15 
western porcupine 10 
 

• Broadcast at 25-30 kg/ha  
• Use only Certified Canada No. 1 or the best available seed grade. Retain seed 

certificates for seed mixes and present, upon request, to government 
agencies. Do not accept seed mixes containing restricted or noxious weeds. 

--- • No residual effects identified. 



 

P
age 6-130 

TABLE 6.12  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential 

Effect Component 
Project 

Boundary Recommendations / Mitigative Measures1 
EGC/Enbridge Manual 

Reference Residual Effect(s) 
6(c) Weed introduction during 

construction and 
operations 

Tanks Footprint to 
Local 

• Patches of the noxious weed, leafy spurge were observed at the site during 
surveys in 2004 (see Appendix IV of this ESA). 

• Employ standard weed control measures such as cleaning equipment prior to 
arrival at the station as described in the EGC. 

• Monitor and control weeds during the operation of the tanks. 

EGC 02-2 
EGC 02-4 

• Weed introduction and/or spreading 
from disturbance may occur at the 
Hardisty Terminal. 

7. WILDLIFE AND WILDLIFE HABITAT 
7(a) Loss of wildlife habitat Tanks Footprint • Minimize workspace area.  

• Dispose of slash in accordance with methods outlined in the EGC and 
municipal regulations. Do not burn slash. 

--- • Approximately 17 ha of vegetation 
important to wildlife will be removed 
at the Hardisty Terminal. 

7(b) Auditory or visual 
disturbances of wildlife 
during construction 

Tanks Footprint to 
Local 

• Prohibit personnel from harassing or feeding wildlife or livestock during tank 
construction. Pets or firearms will not be permitted at the site. 

• Prohibit recreational use of all-terrain vehicles at the site by construction 
personnel. 

EGC 02-2 • Displacement of wildlife away from 
Hardisty Terminal during tank 
installation with resultant use of 
potentially suboptimal habitat during 
noncritical conditions. 

7(c) Auditory disturbances of 
wildlife during operations 

Tanks Footprint to 
Local 

• Ensure that noise levels at the terminal are in compliance with applicable 
provincial regulations. 

EGC 01-4 • Increase in noise levels in the 
immediate vicinity of the Hardisty 
Terminal will likely displace wildlife 
over the short to long-term. 

7(d) Direct and indirect 
mortality during 
construction 

Tanks Footprint to 
Region 

• Inform contractor that Alberta Clipper Project traffic is to obey all traffic laws. 
• Report encounters or collisions with wildlife to Fish and Wildlife authorities or 

the local police department (see Appendix 6B of this ESA). 
• Collect garbage on a daily basis and dispose of at an approved facility to 

minimize the attraction of wildlife during construction. 

EGC 02-2 • Potential for vehicle/wildlife collisions 
on access routes and at the Hardisty 
Terminal. 

7(e) Disturbance of migratory 
bird nesting during 
construction 

Tanks Footprint • No vegetation clearing or other construction activities involving heavy 
equipment are to occur within the migratory bird nesting period from April 1 to 
July 31. Construction activities may proceed within the nesting period where 
the area has been precleared or premowed prior to April 1 or with approval 
from Environment Canada.  

• In areas where preclearing/premowing activities have not been completed 
prior to April 1, a breeding bird survey will be undertaken by a qualified avian 
biologist prior to initiating the above noted activities. Environment Canada will 
review the proposed survey methods and results, and in the event that a nest 
is discovered, be consulted in the development of mitigation strategies. If 
adequate mitigative measures are not available, work in proximity to an active 
nest will be postponed until the nest is no longer active. 

--- • Given that the proposed mitigative 
measures will ensure that nests of 
migratory birds will not be disturbed 
by tank installation activities, no 
residual effects have been identified. 

8. SPECIES AT RISK      
8(a) Loss of site-specific 

habitat used by wildlife 
species at risk 

Tanks Footprint to 
Local 

• A wildlife survey was conducted at the Hardisty Terminal in NE and SE 19-42-
9 W4M in spring 2004 (see Appendix IV of this ESA). No wildlife species at 
risk were observed nesting in or adjacent to the site.  

• Additional field studies will be completed in spring/summer of the year prior to 
construction at the site (see Section 9.0 of the ESA).  

• Implement one or more of the mitigative measures identified in Appendix 6B of 
this ESA in the event of a discovery of wildlife species at risk is discovered 
during either supplemental field studies or construction.  

--- • Alteration of potential habitat 
supporting wildlife species. 

• See Wildlife and Wildlife Habitat 
element 7(a) of this table. 



 

P
age 6-131 

TABLE 6.12  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential 

Effect Component 
Project 

Boundary Recommendations / Mitigative Measures1 
EGC/Enbridge Manual 

Reference Residual Effect(s) 
8(b) Potential disturbance of 

wildlife species at risk in 
vicinity of Hardisty 
Terminal 

Tanks Local • If tank installation is scheduled to be conducted during the breeding period, 
conduct a sweep for wildlife SARA species on noncultivated lands within 
500 m of the terminal prior to the initiation of activities. Should a SARA species 
be identified, determine appropriate mitigative measures to minimize 
disturbance in consultation with Environment Canada. 

• Breeding periods for potential SARA bird species include: 
 loggerhead shrike:  April 15 - July 15 
 burrowing owl:  April 15 - August 15 
 piping plover:  May 1 - July 31 
 Sprague's pipit:  April 15 - August 31 
 yellow rail:   May 1 to August 15 
 long-billed curlew:  April 15 - July 15 

--- • No residual effects identified. 

9. HUMAN OCCUPANCY AND RESOURCE USE   
9(a) Potential alterations to 

existing viewsheds  
Tanks 

Buildings 
Fence 

Footprint to 
Local 

• Follow measures outlined in Detail 6.2 for creating a vegetative screen along 
the west side of the expansion site. 

• The new tanks cannot be viewed from a major highway. 
• Minimize light intrusion on areas adjacent to the pump station by reducing the 

number of lights and light intensity as much as practical without compromising 
safety.  

--- • The installation of aboveground 
facilities (i.e., buildings, fences, 
piping, tanks) will form part of the 
visual landscape at the Hardisty 
Terminal over the long-term. 

10. HERITAGE RESOURCES    
10(a) Disturbance of identified 

surface heritage resource 
sites prior to construction 
and previously 
unidentified buried sites 
during construction  

Tanks Footprint • An Historical Resources Overview will be undertaken at the site (see 
Section 9.0 of this ESA). Implement appropriate measures identified in the 
Heritage Resources Discovery Contingency Plan (Appendix 6B of this ESA) in 
the event of discovery of archaeological or historical finds during the HRIA if 
an HRIA is required. 

• Implement the Heritage Resources Discovery Contingency Plan in 
Appendix 6B of this ESA in the event that previously unidentified 
archaeological or historical finds are discovered during construction. 

• Suspend construction activity in the vicinity of any historical, archaeological or 
palaeontological resources discovered during construction until authorized by 
provincial authorities.  

• Resume work once permission has been granted from the provincial 
authorities. 

EGC 02 2 • Identified surface sites and 
previously unidentified buried 
heritage resources may be disturbed 
during the proposed tank installation. 

11. INFRASTRUCTURE AND SERVICES  
11(a) transport of workers and 

supplies during 
construction 

Tanks Footprint to 
Region 

• Advise all Alberta Clipper-related vehicles to follow applicable traffic, road-use 
and safety laws. 

• The contractor will develop a traffic management plan to manage vehicular 
movements on highways and local roads.  

--- • Increased traffic on highways and 
local roads used to access the 
Hardisty Terminal will occur during 
tank construction. 

11(b) Waste management 
during construction 

Tanks Footprint to 
Region 

• Collect waste from work site on a daily basis. 
• Transport and dispose of all wastes in accordance with provincial and federal 

regulatory requirements. 
• Locate temporary toilets at convenient location on the construction site. 
• Follow the measures outlined in Enbridge's Waste Management Plan on file 

with the NEB. 

EGC 02-2 /  
Enbridge Waste Management 

Plan 

• Temporary increase in waste flow to 
regional landfill sites will occur.  



 

P
age 6-132 

TABLE 6.12  Cont'd 

Biophysical or Socio- 
Economic Element/Potential 

Effect Component 
Project 

Boundary Recommendations / Mitigative Measures1 
EGC/Enbridge Manual 

Reference Residual Effect(s) 
11(c) worker accommodation 

needs may displace 
tourists  

Tanks Local to 
Region 

• Enbridge or its contractor is to install a temporary construction camp to 
accommodate Project workers associated with all components of the Alberta 
Clipper Project in the Hardisty area due to the limited availability of local and 
regional accommodation. 

• Treat sewage and grey water as per municipal and provincial permits. Dispose 
of waste in accordance with municipal and provincial permits as well as the 
Enbridge Waste Management Plan currently on file with the NEB. 

• Obtain approval from the applicable regulatory authority prior to withdrawing 
water from nearby water source for use in the temporary construction camp. 
Otherwise, haul fresh water to camps. 

--- • Some local or regional tourist 
accommodations near Hardisty will 
be temporarily occupied by 
regulatory inspectors and company 
personnel. 

12. ACCIDENTS AND MALFUNCTIONS    
12(a) Spills of hazardous 

materials during 
construction 

All Footprint  • Report spills immediately to the Environmental Inspector and, if warranted, 
appropriate government agencies. 

• Implement Enbridge’s Emergency Response Plan in the event of a spill or leak 
of hydrocarbons.  

EGC 02-2 / 
Enbridge O&MPs, Book 7: 

Emergency Response, Section 
03-02-02 

• Spot spills, once remediated, will 
have little adverse residual effect, 
although other resources could be 
affected or lost as a result of the 
accident.  

12(b) Oil release during 
operations 

All Footprint to 
Local 

• Design and install the proposed storage tanks in compliance with appropriate 
standards (including CCME Environmental Code of Practice for Aboveground 
Storage Tank Systems Containing Petroleum Products), regulations, best 
industry practices and guidelines for permanent crude oil tanks. 

• Equip new tanks with an under-tank leak detection system and, to minimize 
corrosion of the tanks, install cathodic protection. 

• Visually inspect tanks, diked areas and dykes on a monthly basis for evidence 
of problems, damage or leaks. A certified inspector is to conduct an external 
inspection of the storage tanks at least every five years. Take corrective action 
immediately and clean up any spills or leaks. Document abnormal 
circumstances. 

• Minimize the potential for malfunction of the facilities during operations by 
adhering to preventative measures outlined in Enbridge's Emergency 
Response Plan on file with the NEB. 

• In the unlikely event of a release, follow Enbridge's Emergency Response Plan 
currently on file with the NEB. Expand the Emergency Response Plan to 
include new tanks associated with the Alberta Clipper Project. 

EGC 02-2 / 
Enbridge Operating & 

Maintenance Procedures, Book 7: 
Emergency Response, Section 

03-02-02 

• Although the likelihood of such an 
event is low, a large-scale oil release 
may affect other resources. 

12(c) Fire during construction All Footprint • Follow the measures identified within Enbridge's Emergency Response Plan in 
the event of an accidental fire. 

EGC 02-2 /  
Enbridge O&MPs, Book 2: Safety 

Section 05 

• Despite vigilance, fires may 
adversely affect adjacent vegetation, 
and in very rare situations, affect 
wildlife and adjacent property. 

Note: 1 Detailed mitigative measures are outlined in Enbridge's EGC (2003) on file with the NEB. 



 
CRITERIA FOR IMPLEMENTATION: 
 
A vegetative screen will be planted on the west side of the Hardisty Terminal tank expansion area to act as a visual buffer to 
residences west of the site.  
 
 
 
Notes: 
 
Planting a vegetation screen on the west side of the tank expansion area with native species will involve the following. Trembling 
aspen (Populus tremuloides) and saskatoon (Amelanchier alnifolia) will be planted in a 10 m wide swath in the configuration below. 
All plantings will require weekly waterings for the first month following planting and bi-weekly waterings through the balance of the 
first growing season. Depending on spring and summer soil moisture levels, it is suggested that bi-weekly waterings continue into 
the second growing season.   
 

 
 
Plant species 2.5 m apart from west to east and 3 m apart from north to south - stagger plants in an alternating configuration to 
maximize growing space and available light. 
 
At the above configuration and spacing, a 100 m linear distance would require approximately: 
 
-116 Aspen 
-24 Saskatoon 
 
 
 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

HARDISTY TERMINAL TANK EXPANSION VEGETATION SCREEN 

 4462 April 2007 Detail 6.2 

 
 



 

P
age 6-134 

TABLE 6.13 
 

SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF ADVERSE RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF IDENTIFIED BIOPHYSICAL 
AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC ELEMENTS OF HARDISTY TERMINAL TANK INSTALLATION  

Temporal Context 

Adverse Residual Effects Im
pa

ct
 B

al
an

ce
 

Sp
at

ia
l C

on
te

xt
 

Du
ra

tio
n 

Fr
eq

ue
nc

y 

Re
ve

rs
ib

ili
ty

 

M
ag

ni
tu

de
 

Pr
ob

ab
ili

ty
 

Co
nf

id
en

ce
 

Si
gn

ifi
ca

nc
e1

 

1. SOIL CAPABILITY          
 Minor topsoil / subsoil mixing may occur at the Hardisty Terminal due to tank 

installation. 
negative footprint medium-term isolated long-term low high high not 

significant 
2. GREENHOUSE GASES AND AIR QUALITY          

2(a) Indirect GHG emissions will increase during operation of new pumps. negative footprint to 
region 

long-term continuous short-term low high high not 
significant 

2(b) Increase in vehicle emissions will occur during tank installation at the Hardisty 
Terminal. 

negative footprint to 
region 

medium-term isolated short-term low high high not 
significant 

2(c) Odours may be emitted from new tanks. negative region long-term occasional immediate to 
long-term 

low high high not 
significant 

Greenhouse Gases and Air Quality Summary - Residual effect summary 
assessment of all components of Greenhouse Gases and Air Quality. 

negative footprint to 
region 

medium to long-
term 

isolated to 
continuous 

immediate to 
long-term 

low high high not 
significant 

3. ACOUSTIC ENVIRONMENT          
3(a) Increase in noise will occur during tank installation at the Hardisty Terminal. negative footprint to 

local 
medium-term isolated immediate low high high not 

significant 
3(b) Ambient noise levels at the Hardisty Terminal may increase during operations. negative footprint to 

local 
long-term continuous immediate low high high not 

significant 
Acoustic Environment Summary - Residual effect summary assessment of all 
components of Acoustic Environment. 

negative footprint to 
local 

medium to long-
term 

isolated to 
continuous 

immediate low high high not 
significant 

4. VEGETATION          
4(a) Loss of approximately 17 ha of vegetation important to wildlife at the Hardisty 

Terminal. 
negative footprint medium-term isolated long-term low high high not 

significant 
4(b) Weed introduction and/or spreading from disturbance may occur at the Hardisty 

Terminal. 
negative footprint to 

local 
medium-term isolated medium-term low high moderate to 

high 
not 

significant 
Vegetation Summary - Residual effect summary assessment of all components of 

Vegetation. 
negative footprint to 

local 
medium-term isolated medium to long-

term 
low high moderate to 

high 
not 

significant 
5. WILDLIFE AND WILDLIFE HABITAT          
5(a) Loss of approximately 22 ha of wildlife habitat at the Hardisty Terminal. negative footprint medium-term isolated long-term low high high not 

significant 
5(b) Displacement of wildlife away from the Hardisty Terminal during tank installation 

with resultant use of potentially suboptimal habitat during noncritical conditions. 
negative footprint to 

local 
medium-term isolated short-term low high high not 

significant 
5(c) Increase in noise levels in the immediate vicinity of the Hardisty Terminal will 

likely displace wildlife over the short to long-term. 
negative footprint to 

local 
long-term continuous short to long-

term 
low high moderate to 

high 
not 

significant 
 



 

P
age 6-135 

TABLE 6.13  Cont'd 

Temporal Context 

Adverse Residual Effects Im
pa

ct
 B

al
an

ce
 

Sp
at

ia
l C

on
te

xt
 

Du
ra

tio
n 

Fr
eq

ue
nc

y 

Re
ve

rs
ib

ili
ty

 

M
ag

ni
tu

de
 

Pr
ob

ab
ili

ty
 

Co
nf

id
en

ce
 

Si
gn

ifi
ca

nc
e1

 

5(d) Potential for vehicle/wildlife collisions on access routes and at the Hardisty 
Terminal. 

negative footprint to 
region 

medium-term isolated short-term low low high not 
significant 

Wildlife and Wildlife Habitat Summary- Residual effect summary assessment of all 
components of Wildlife and Wildlife Habitat. 

negative footprint to 
region 

medium to long-
term 

isolated to 
continuous 

short to long-
term 

low low to 
high 

moderate to 
high 

not 
significant 

6. SPECIES AT RISK          
 Loss of potential habitat supporting wildlife species at risk and displacement 

of wildlife species at risk away from the Hardisty Terminal during tank 
installation.  

negative footprint to 
local 

medium-term isolated long-term low low moderate not 
significant 

7. HUMAN OCCUPANCY AND RESOURCE USE          
 The installation of aboveground facilities (i.e., tanks, buildings, piping, fencing) 

will form part of the visual landscape at the Hardisty Terminal over the long-
term. 

negative  local long-term isolated long-term low  high high not 
significant 

8. HERITAGE RESOURCES          
 Identified surface sites and previously unidentified buried heritage resources 

may be disturbed during the proposed tank installation. 
negative footprint medium-term isolated permanent low low to 

high 
high not 

significant 
9. INFRASTRUCTURE AND SERVICES          
9(a) Increased traffic on highways and local roads used to access the Hardisty 

Terminal will occur during tank construction. 
negative footprint to 

region 
medium-term isolated short-term low high high not 

significant 
9(b) Temporary increase in waste flow to regional landfill sites will occur.  negative local to region medium-term isolated immediate to 

short-term 
low high high not 

significant 
9(c) Some local or regional tourist accommodations near Hardisty will be temporarily 

occupied by regulatory inspectors and company personnel. 
negative local to region medium-term isolated immediate to 

short-term 
low high high not 

significant 
Infrastructure and Services Summary- Residual effect summary assessment of all 

components of Infrastructure and Services. 
negative footprint to 

region 
medium-term isolated immediate to 

short-term 
low high high not 

significant 
10. ACCIDENTS AND MALFUNCTIONS          
10(a) Spot spills, once remediated, will have little adverse residual effect, although 

other resources could be affected or lost as a result of the accident. 
negative footprint to 

local 
short-term accidental short-term low to high low moderate not 

significant 
10(b) Although the likelihood of such an event is low, a large scale oil release may 

affect other resources. 
negative footprint to 

local 
short-term accidental short-term to 

permanent 
low to high low high not 

significant 
10(c) Fires may adversely affect adjacent vegetation and, in very rare situations, affect 

wildlife and adjacent property. 
negative footprint to 

local 
immediate to 

short-term 
accidental short to long-

term 
low to high low moderate not 

significant 
Accidents and Malfunctions Summary - Residual effect summary assessment of all 

components of Accidents and Malfunctions. 
negative footprint to 

local 
immediate to 

short-term 
accidental short to 

permanent 
low to high low moderate to 

high 
not 

significant 

Note:  1. Significant Adverse Residual Effect: A high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically mitigated or economically compensated. 
 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

APPENDIX 6A 
 

PIPELINE CONSTRUCTION AND RECLAMATION PLAN 
 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 
 Page 6A-i  
 
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 

1.0 CONSTRUCTION AND RECLAMATION PLAN.........................................................................6A-1 
1.1 Scope .............................................................................................................................6A-1 
1.2 Reclamation Plan Objectives and Goals .......................................................................6A-1 
1.3 Construction and Reclamation Plan Details ..................................................................6A-1 

 

LIST OF FIGURES 
Figure 6A-1 Criteria for Topsoil Salvage Procedures ........................................................................6A-2 
 

LIST OF DRAWINGS 
Detail 6A-1 Narrow Down Fencing....................................................................................................6A-8 
Detail 6A-2 Live Plant Salvage and Transplant ................................................................................6A-9 
Detail 6A-3 Temporary Bridge or Dirt Ramp Over Rare Plants ..................................................... 6A-10 
Detail 6A-4 Native and Rare Plant Seed Collection....................................................................... 6A-12 
Detail 6A-5 Chipping ...................................................................................................................... 6A-13 
Detail 6A-6a Weed Management..................................................................................................... 6A-14 
Detail 6A-6b Typical Weed Clean-Off Station - Air .......................................................................... 6A-15 
Detail 6A-6c Typical Weed Clean-Off Station - High Pressure Water............................................. 6A-16 
Detail 6A-7 Materials Handling at Road and Rail Bores................................................................ 6A-17 
Detail 6A-8 Sidehill Grading........................................................................................................... 6A-18 
Detail 6A-9 Irrigated Lands ............................................................................................................ 6A-19 
Detail 6A-10 Topsoil Salvage - Blade Width.................................................................................... 6A-20 
Detail 6A-11 Topsoil Salvage - Trench and Spoil Area ................................................................... 6A-21 
Detail 6A-12 Topsoil Salvage - Full Right-of-Way ........................................................................... 6A-22 
Detail 6A-13 Topsoil Salvage - Trench and Work Lane .................................................................. 6A-23 
Detail 6A-14 Topsoil Salvage - Reduced Salvage Width ................................................................ 6A-24 
Detail 6A-15 Three-Lift Soils Handling - On Well-Sodded Land...................................................... 6A-25 
Detail 6A-16 Three-Lift Soils Handling - On Cultivated Land .......................................................... 6A-26 
Detail 6A-17 Topsoil Salvage - Trench, Spoil and Work Lane ........................................................ 6A-27 
Detail 6A-18 Tackify Topsoil Windrow ............................................................................................. 6A-28 
Detail 6A-19 Subdrain...................................................................................................................... 6A-29 
Detail 6A-20 Trench Breakers / Ditch Plugs .................................................................................... 6A-30 
Detail 6A-21 Spring Clean-up .......................................................................................................... 6A-31 
Detail 6A-22 Delayed Grade / Topsoil Replacement - Protection from Soil Erosion....................... 6A-33 
Detail 6A-23 Cross Ditches and Diversion Berms ........................................................................... 6A-34 
Detail 6A-24 Silt Fence Installation.................................................................................................. 6A-35 
Detail 6A-25 Vehicle Crossing - Typical Temporary Bridge ............................................................ 6A-36 
Detail 6A-26 Vehicle Crossing - Typical Swamp Mat Ford.............................................................. 6A-37 
Detail 6A-27 Vehicle Crossing - Typical Ice Bridge ......................................................................... 6A-38 
Detail 6A-28 Vehicle Crossing - Snow Fill ....................................................................................... 6A-39 
Detail 6A-29 Vehicle Crossing - Typical Ramp and Culvert ............................................................ 6A-40 
Detail 6A-30 Watercourse Crossing - Open Cut of Small Watercourses ........................................ 6A-41 
Detail 6A-31 Watercourse Crossing - Isolation: Flume.................................................................... 6A-42 
Detail 6A-32 Watercourse Crossing - Isolation: Dam and Pump..................................................... 6A-44 
Detail 6A-33 Watercourse Crossing - High Volume Pump .............................................................. 6A-46 
Detail 6A-34 Watercourse Crossing - Trenchless: Bore / Punch..................................................... 6A-47 
Detail 6A-35 Watercourse Crossing - Large Directional Drill........................................................... 6A-48 
Detail 6A-36 Watercourse Crossing - Channel Diversion................................................................ 6A-50 
Detail 6A-37 Streambank Protection - Riprap Armour..................................................................... 6A-51 
Detail 6A-38 Typical Live Shrub Staking ......................................................................................... 6A-52 
Detail 6A-39 Hedge / Brush Layering .............................................................................................. 6A-54 
Detail 6A-40 Tackifier on Steep Slopes ........................................................................................... 6A-55 
Detail 6A-41 Rollback for Erosion Control ....................................................................................... 6A-56 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 
 Page 6A-ii  
 
 

Detail 6A-42 Erosion Control Matting - Slopes ................................................................................ 6A-57 
Detail 6A-43 Staked Logs for Erosion Control ................................................................................. 6A-58 
Detail 6A-44 Track Cleat Imprinting................................................................................................. 6A-59 
Detail 6A-45 Straw Crimping............................................................................................................ 6A-60 
Detail 6A-46 Seed Mixes ................................................................................................................. 6A-61 
Detail 6A-47 Drill Seeding................................................................................................................ 6A-63 
Detail 6A-48 Broadcast Seeding...................................................................................................... 6A-64 
Detail 6A-49 Cover Crop.................................................................................................................. 6A-65 
Detail 6A-50 Dune Sand Soil and Other Sandy Areas .................................................................... 6A-66 
Detail 6A-51 Wetland Function ........................................................................................................ 6A-67 
 

 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 
 Page 6A-1  
 
 

1.0 CONSTRUCTION AND RECLAMATION PLAN 

1.1 Scope 

The Construction and Reclamation Plan is designed to complement the mitigative measures identified in 
Tables 6.2 and 6.3 of this ESA as well as Enbridge’s EGC document. Mitigative measures and criteria for 
their implementation are provided with a sufficient level of flexibility to ensure that the most appropriate 
mitigative measures are implemented during the construction and reclamation phases of the pipeline 
portion of the Alberta Clipper Project. 

The measures identified in Tables 6.2 and 6.3 of this ESA and the Construction and Reclamation Plan will 
be used in conjunction with the Environmental Alignment Sheets by Enbridge’s inspection staff and 
contractor personnel during construction, clean-up and reclamation of the Project. 

The measures and other work described in the Construction and Reclamation Plan will apply primarily to 
the Project at specific locations, however, in some cases, to the overall Project in general. Implementation 
of some measures included in the Construction and Reclamation Plan may commence prior to the 
construction phase and continue into the operations phase. Post-construction monitoring programs have 
been developed to ensure that the measures, activities and other works identified in the Construction and 
Reclamation Plan were effective (see Section 8.0 of the ESA).  

1.2 Reclamation Plan Objectives and Goals 

Environmental protection and reclamation measures have been specified in consideration of the existing 
land use and biophysical conditions along the route with the objective of returning the right-of-way as near 
to preconstruction conditions as feasible within a practical time frame. On agricultural lands, reclamation 
objectives emphasize controlling surface erosion and conserving soil quality for agricultural purposes. On 
native grasslands and riparian areas where the species composition of natural plant communities may be 
difficult to restore following disturbance, emphasis is placed on reducing the total area of disturbance and 
providing a reclaimed condition that will facilitate restoration of the native plant populations and 
communities.  

1.3 Construction and Reclamation Plan Details 

The following outlines the applicable Details for the construction of the pipeline, including watercourses, 
and weed control as well as measures to minimize the disturbance and promote restoration of special 
features like rare plants and areas potentially difficult to reclaim such as Dune Sand soil and other sandy 
areas. 

Topsoil Stripping 

The objectives of topsoil salvaging are to minimize impacts to topsoil capability, surface drainage 
patterns, land use and wildlife habitat. Criteria for topsoil salvage procedures during nonfrozen and frozen 
soil conditions are identified in Figure 6A-1 by specific circumstances and include: 

• blade width topsoil salvage (Detail 6A-10); 

• trench and spoil area topsoil salvage (Detail 6A-11); 

• full right-of-way topsoil salvage (Detail 6A-12); 

• trench and work lane topsoil salvage (Detail 6A-13); 

• reduced salvage width (Detail 6A-14); 

• three-lift soils handling on well-sodded land (Detail 6A-15); 

• three-lift soils handling on cultivated land (Detail 6A-16); and 

• trench, spoil and work land topsoil salvage (Detail 6A-17). 







Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 
 Page 6A-4  
 
 

In addition, measures for sidehill grading are included on Detail 6A-8 and for road and rail bores on 
Detail 6A-7. Detail 6A-21 describes measures for topsoil replacement during spring clean-up and 
Detail 6A-22 includes protection measures from soil erosion for delayed grade or topsoil replacement due 
to construction schedule considerations. 

Vehicle Crossing Structures 

Four vehicle crossing structures are proposed during the construction of the proposed pipeline: 

• temporary bridge (Detail 6A-25); 

• typical swamp mat ford (Detail 6A-26); 

• ice bridge (Detail 6A-27);  

• snow fill (Detail 6A-28); and 

• ramp and culvert (Detail 6A-29). 

Watercourse Crossing Construction 

Watercourses along the route range from small non-fish bearing watercourses to moderately large and 
sensitive watercourses. Procedures for watercourse crossings include: 

• open cut of small watercourses (Detail 6A-30);  

• typical flume (Detail 6A-31); 

• typical dam and pump (Detail 6A-32); 

• high volume pump (Detail 6A-33); 

• bore or punch (Detail 6A-34); 

• large directional drill (Detail 6A-35); and 

• channel diversion (Detail 6A-36). 

Rare Plants 

Rare plant surveys will be conducted in the spring and summer of 2007. General mitigation strategies 
have been developed for this Project to accomplish effective protection of any rare plant populations and 
communities that are found during the surveys (see Table 6.2 and the Plant Species of Concern 
Discovery Contingency Plan in Appendix 6B of this ESA). These measures include: 

• narrowing down the right-of-way and flagging or fencing-off the feature of concern to avoid impact 
during construction (Detail 6A-1); 

• salvaging and transplanting individual rare vascular plant species, when they are located in a position 
on the right-of-way that cannot be avoided (Detail 6A-2); 

• placing protective structures or snow and ice work pads over the plants of concern where site-specific 
conditions, plant species characteristics and timing of construction allow for effective protection 
(Detail 6A-3); and 

• collecting seed from mature vascular plants that are poor candidates for transplant and in a position 
on the right-of-way where disturbance cannot be avoided (Detail 6A-4). 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 
 Page 6A-5  
 
 

Soil Erosion Control 

Some areas of the right-of-way are susceptible to wind and/or water erosion. Detail 6A-18 includes 
measures to minimize wind erosion of the topsoil windrow during construction. Details 6A-19, 6A-20 and 
6A-23 describe measures for the installation of subdrains, trench breakers and ditch plugs and cross-
ditches and diversion berms. Measures related to general right-of-way revegetation also address soil 
erosion control. 

Numerous methods are proposed for revegetation of the right-of-way and a number of special measures 
will be implemented depending on site-specific conditions. These measures include:  

• salvaging shrubs, native seeds and rare plants for transplant onto the right-of-way following 
construction (Detail 6A-2); 

• collecting native seed from local species that cannot be obtained from other sources (Detail 6A-4);  

• seeding with seed mixes by natural subregion or ecoregion (by drill or broadcast seeding (Detail 6A-
46, Detail 6A-47, Detail 6A-48);  

• seeding with a cover crop (Detail 6A-49);  

• track cleat imprinting and straw crimping on soils with a potential for wind erosion (Detail 6A-44, 
Detail 6A-45);  

• placing erosion control matting, rollback, wood chipping, tackifier or staked logs along the right-of-way 
on steep slopes or exposed sites that will be difficult to stabilize (Detail 6A-42, Detail 6A-41, 
Detail 6A-5, Detail 6A-40, Detail 6A-43). 

Measures for returning irrigated lands to equivalent land capability are outlined in Detail 6A-9. 

Watercourses 

Stabilization of the banks and slopes of watercourses and riparian areas prior to and immediately 
following construction is critical to the reclamation of the habitat at watercourses. Mitigation measures 
have been developed to enhance the restoration of watercourses. These measures involve the 
installation of numerous bank and slope protecting structures including: 

• erosion control matting (Detail 6A-42); 

• silt fences (Detail 6A-24);  

• hedge-brush layering (Detail 6A-39); 

• shrub staking and willow staking (Detail 6A-38); and 

• riprap rock armouring (Detail 6A-37). 

Other revegetation strategies include native seed mixes (Detail 6A-46) and cover crops (Detail 6A-49), 
where appropriate.  

Wildlife 

Several wildlife species of concern and species at risk or their habitat have been identified along the 
proposed route during previous wildlife surveys for CEP and Terrace Phases I and II. Additional wildlife 
studies will be conducted in spring/early summer 2007 on segments of the route supporting native 
vegetation or pasture lands greater than 500 m in length to identify site-specific features associated with 
sensitive wildlife species in the vicinity of the proposed route. General mitigation strategies have been 
developed for this Project to accomplish effective protection of critical or key wildlife habitat that are found 
during the surveys (see Table 6.2 of this ESA). 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 
 Page 6A-6  
 
 

Avoid construction within the April 1 to July 31 peak nesting period along segments of the route that 
traverse lands associated for bird use (i.e., refuges, DU projects, CAs, NAWMP priority areas, migratory 
bird concentration sites), native prairie, pasture lands greater than 500 m in length and large wetlands 
(Table 6.4) or areas with a high density of small potholes with habitat suitable for waterfowl production 
unless otherwise approved by provincial and federal wildlife authorities. If construction cannot be 
completed outside of April 1 to July 31, pre-clear and pre-mow the right-of-way prior to April 1 to 
discourage nesting. If pre-clearing and pre-mowing is not practical, complete a nesting bird survey prior to 
construction to identify nest locations along the right-of-way. Postpone construction activities in the 
vicinity of nest locations on or adjacent to the right-of-way until nestlings have fledged. 

Maintain water levels in wetlands. Do not drain wetlands in this area unless otherwise 
approved/requested by provincial and federal authorities. Restore disturbed areas in wetlands to 
preconstruction profile during reclamation. Remove any excess backfill to an upland location approved by 
the appropriate regulatory authorities. [EGC 03-2, EGC 03-3]. In the DU wetland project areas, avoid 
disturbing constructed works (e.g., dikes, ditches, dams, control structures, etc.) in wetlands. 

Problem Soils Restoration  

The topography and soils encountered along some segments of the proposed route may provide special 
challenges for restoration. Soil-related restoration issues due to steep slopes and relatively high 
susceptibility to wind and water erosion of soils occur in the Dune Sand soil and other sandy areas, 
including Sounding Dunes, Elbow PFRA Community Pasture, Oak Lake Sand Hills and Souris Sand Hills 
(Detail 6A-50). 

Wetland Restoration  

Mitigation measures to be implemented to restore wetland function at wetlands encountered along the 
proposed pipeline route are provided in Detail 6A-51. 

Restoration on PFRA Lands 

Site-specific restoration measures for the Progress, Mariposa and Elbow PFRA community pasture lands 
are detailed in Appendix V of the ESA.  

Weed and Invasive Species Control 

Management of invasive plant species is essential to maintaining the ecological integrity of lands 
supporting native vegetation and equivalent land capability for agricultural lands. Measures to reduce the 
spread of weeds are provided in Detail 6A-6. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 
 Page 6A-7  
 
 

 

 

 

 

DETAILS 
 

CONSTRUCTION AND RECLAMATION PLAN DETAILS 

 



 
 
 

 

 
CRITERIA FOR IMPLEMENTATION 
 
The width of the construction right-of-way will be narrowed, where feasible and construction safety is not compromised, to avoid 
site-specific features such as archaeological sites, rare plants, significant plant communities, site-specific wildlife habitat as well as 
shelterbelts where requested by landowners. The specific features will be fenced or otherwise protected throughout the duration of 
construction.  
 
Notes: 
1. Identify and stake or flag the boundaries of the feature to be protected where it encroaches on the right-of-way. 

2. Implement applicable measures in the Traffic Control Plan (Appendix 6C). 

3. Install barrier fencing using material that will not be hazardous to livestock. In areas where livestock may be present, 
construct the barrier fence using posts and barbed wire, planks, or other Enbridge approved material, to prevent construction 
traffic from encroaching onto the protected area. Snow fence or construction guard fencing may be used at locations where 
no livestock will be present during the period the fence will be in place. 

4. Where narrowing of the work side is sufficient to protect the feature, minimize the workspace to as narrow an area as safely 
practical.  

5. Where further narrowing is required, develop site-specific plans to complete construction through the area while protecting 
the feature. 

6. Maintain fencing and barriers until all construction and reclamation activities are completed. 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

NARROW DOWN FENCING 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-1 

 



 
CRITERIA FOR IMPLEMENTATION 
 
Live plant material salvage will generally consist of two types of salvage: 
• salvage of shrubs with rootball; and  
• salvage and transplant of rare plants. 
 
All collection, salvage and transportation of live plant material will be done following approval by the appropriate authority. 
 
SALVAGE OF SHRUBS WITH ROOTBALL 
Shrubs for salvage will be selected by qualified personnel 
and flagged prior to construction activities in that area. 
1. To the extent possible, shrub salvage will be done 

during dormancy (mid September to bud break). 
2. Shrub salvage will be timed to minimize period 

between salvage and restoration planting. 
3. Prior to salvage, prune back shrub top growth as 

directed by qualified personnel. Salvage shrubs 
using a backhoe. Remove as large a rootball as 
feasible. 

4. Cover the rootball of the salvaged plants with burlap 
or geotextile. Keep the covered rootball slightly moist 
(but not saturated) until the plants are replanted. 

 

RARE PLANTS 
1. The rare plants along the right-of-way that require transplanting have been identified by a qualified botanical expert and will be 

flagged prior to clearing.  
2. A qualified botanical expert will select a suitable receiving site for the plant. The receiving site should be adjacent to the 

construction right-of-way, in an area having a similar microsite to where the rare plant had been growing.  
3. Delay salvaging activities until immediately prior to construction. Cut back or prune plants to be salvaged as directed by the 

Environmental Inspector in consultation with the botanical expert. Salvage designated plants using a shovel or backhoe. 
Remove as large a rootball as feasible. Cover the rootball of the salvaged plants with burlap or geotextile. Keep the covered 
rootball slightly moist (but not saturated) until the plants are replanted. 

4. Replant the salvaged plant in the receiving site as soon as possible following salvage. 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

LIVE PLANT SALVAGE AND TRANSPLANT 

 4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-2 

 



 
CRITERIA FOR IMPLEMENTATION - TEMPORARY BRIDGE 
 
This procedure will be used when the rare plants are located on the work side of the right-of-way in an area that does not require 
topsoil salvage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

Notes: 

1. Install a temporary bridge (e.g., log, pre-fabricated span) to allow vehicles to cross over rare plants. Bridge length is generally 
limited to areas less than 30 m in length. 

2. Utilize approach fills rather than cuts to minimize ground disturbance. Use a geotextile liner to prevent fine material 
sedimentation onto rare plants. 

3. Install curb stringers of logs or plywood to ensure that fill material does not spill onto surrounding area, if required. 

4. Remove bridge immediately after use. Remove support structures and approach fills. 

5. Install other temporary bridge structures as approved by the Environmental Inspector.  
 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

TEMPORARY BRIDGE OR DIRT RAMP OVER RARE PLANTS 

 4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-3a 



 
CRITERIA FOR IMPLEMENTATION – DIRT RAMP 
 
This procedure will be utilized on a trial basis at selected sites where narrowing down is insufficient as a mitigative measure for the 
protection of rare plant communities on the right-of-way. The decision to implement this procedure will be based on plant species, 
construction timing (e.g., early or late summer) and suitability of other protection measures as determined by the Environmental 
Inspector and botanical expert. 
 
 
 
 

 

Notes: 

1. Narrow down right-of-way to eliminate passing lane and fence off the feature of concern (Detail 6A-1) until ready to construct 
ramp. 

2. Immediately prior to construction of this section, remove the mats, place geotextile pads, flexnet or swamp mats on work side 
and spoil side, as required, to protect rare plant population. 

3. Strip topsoil from the trench area and place on geotextile on opposite side of trench from pipe lay-up and work lane. 

4. Excavate trench spoil and place on geotextile on the work side. Spread spoil over the width of the geotextile-covered work 
lane to provide a work and travel area. 

5. Avoid scalping vegetated ground surface when backfilling spoil, replacing topsoil and removing pads.  

 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

TEMPORARY BRIDGE OR DIRT RAMP OVER RARE PLANTS 

 4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-3b 

 



 
Native Seed Collection 

 
CRITERIA FOR IMPLEMENTATION 
 
Native seed will be collected from areas of undisturbed native vegetation, either on the right-of-way or at suitable locations off the 
right-of-way with the approval of the landowner and occupant, and appropriate government agency prior to construction. Seeds of 
select species will be collected and stored. 
 
Notes: 
 

1. Potential locations where native seed will be collected from the right-of-way will be determined from the results of field 
surveys. 

2. Potential sites will be inspected in the field to assess for contamination with undesirable species and the presence of 
target desirable species. 

3. Seed will be collected by a qualified botanical expert using an appropriate method. Collections will be conducted numerous 
times throughout the growing season, if feasible, in order to collect seed from as many species as possible.  

4. All phases of native seed collection work will be documented for tracking, including: species collected; location; date; 
amounts; and storage location. 

5. The seed will be processed and cleaned under the supervision of a botanical expert. Viability and weed content tests will 
be conducted.  

6. The seed will be stored in appropriate facilities under the supervision of a botanical expert. 
7. Seeding operations will be supervised by the Environmental Inspector. Seeding procedures, areas and rates will be 

determined by a botanical advisor based on site-specific conditions. 
 
 
 

Rare Plant Seed Collection 
 
CRITERIA FOR IMPLEMENTATION 
 
Rare plant seed will be collected from rare plants along the right-of-way that cannot be avoided or protected during construction.  
 
Notes: 
 

1. Potential locations where rare plant seed will be collected from the right-of-way will be determined from the results of field 
surveys. 

2. Seed will be collected by a qualified botanical expert using an appropriate method.  
3. All phases of rare plant seed collection work will be documented for tracking, including: species collected; location; date; 

amounts; and storage location. 
4. The seed will be processed, cleaned and stored in appropriate facilities under the supervision of a botanical expert.   
5. Collected rare plant seed will be seeded at selected areas under the direct supervision of a botanical expert. Seeding 

operations will be supervised by the Environmental Inspector. Seeding procedures, areas and rates will be determined by 
a botanical expert based on site-specific conditions. 

 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

NATIVE AND RARE PLANT SEED COLLECTION 

 4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-4 

 



 
CRITERIA FOR IMPLEMENTATION 
 
Chipping of nonmerchantable timber or slash will be conducted for erosion control on wind erodible (sandy) soils as directed by the 
Environmental Inspector. 
 
Notes: 
 
1. Retain slash and nonsalvageable timber, where warranted, for use as chip material on wind erodible (sandy) soils. The 

amount and location of timber retained for use as chip material will be determined by the Environmental Inspector. 
 
2. Slash and nonsalvageable timber will be chipped using a truck or trailer-mounted chipper. 
 
3. No chipping or spreading of chipped material will be permitted within 10 m of the high water mark of a watercourse. 
 
4. Spread material evenly over the disturbed areas of the right-of-way to a depth of no more than 2.5 cm, following seeding of 

the reclamation seed mix. 
 
5. Chip only sufficient amounts of slash and nonsalvageable timber to cover the desired area, as directed by the Environmental 

Inspector.  
 
6. Burn or otherwise dispose of excess slash and woody debris. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

CHIPPING 

 4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-5 

 



 
CRITERIA FOR IMPLEMENTATION 
 
Management of invasive plant species is of paramount concern to Enbridge. The goal of invasive species management for the 
Alberta Clipper Project is to prevent the introduction and spread of non-native plants and to eliminate or control them, as practical 
within the project area. To help achieve this goal, the following measures will be implemented during restoration. 
 

1. All equipment shall arrive for work in a clean condition to minimize the risk of weed introduction. Any equipment which arrives 
in a dirty condition will not be allowed to work until it has been cleaned off at a suitable location.  

2. Equipment passing through areas identified as having a weed problem will be shovel and compressed air cleaned prior to 
continuing work on the right-of-way.  

3. Control the growth of noxious or nuisance weeds on topsoil storage piles by hand cultivating, brushing, moving or if 
necessary using selective, nonpersistent herbicides. Control will be initiated before weedy species mature – produce seed. 

4. Weed growth will be monitored during restoration activities, and weed control measures applied on a site-specific basis. 

5. The pipeline project area will be monitored for weed infestations as a part of the Post-Construction Monitoring Program.  

6. Areas of poor plant cover will be reseeded and weed control measures will be applied if warranted. 

7. All equipment cleaning station locations along the proposed route will be assessed in late spring. Weed species of concern 
that are identified at the sites will be treated. Manual removal of plants or chemical treatment will occur. If weeds are 
manually removed when in flower, the weed material will be disposed of in an approved land-fill facility. 

8. Record all weed treatment and monitoring records. 

 
Notes: 
 
1. Pull out or mow the plants from heavily infested areas and dispose of as directed by the Environmental Inspector. 
 
2. Salvage topsoil from the full width of the right-of-way in areas of heavy infestations, as directed by the Environmental 

Inspector.  
 
3. Store topsoil from the affected area separately. 
 
4. Clean all topsoil handling equipment once past the area.  
 
5. Record infestation areas and monitor during post-construction monitoring.  
 
6. Clean all equipment at designated weed clean-off stations during nonfrozen conditions with shovels, compressed air, or high-

pressure water. 
 
7. Record location of clean-off site for future monitoring and, if warranted, weed control. 
 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

WEED MANAGEMENT 

 4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-6a 

 



 

 
CRITERIA FOR IMPLEMENTATION 
 
Weed clean-off stations using compressed air and manual truck cleaning for cleaning soil from construction equipment, may be set 
up where track cleaning by hand and other weed control measures are determined to be insufficient. Clean-off station locations will 
be determined by the Environmental Inspector prior to commencement of construction in the area. Clean-off requirements will apply 
to all construction equipment involved in topsoil handling operations. 
 
Dry cleaning stations using high pressure compressed air for cleaning soil from construction equipment will be established along the 
proposed route at strategic locations to manage weed concerns. Clean-off requirements will apply to all construction equipment 
involved in topsoil handling operations. The diagram below is an example of how a dry cleaning station may be constructed. Final 
design should be determined by the Chief Inspector, in consultation with the Environmental Inspector, once a location has been 
determined.  
 

 
Notes: 
 
1. Construct the dry type clean-off station (compressed air and manual truck cleaning) at an approved location by stripping 

topsoil throughout the station and stockpiling it as shown on the plan.  
2. Cleaning shall be carried out under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the Environmental Inspector.  
3. Use ropes or fencing material to designate the area where the cleaning is to occur.  
4. Ensure that the size of the station is adequate to accommodate the maximum size of equipment.  
5. Equipment is to consistently enter at one end and exit at another 
6. Stockpile contaminated material. 
7. Remove any soils contaminated by petroleum-based or other undesirable materials from clean-off stations in accordance 

with applicable requirements. Burn stockpiled debris, if approved by the appropriate authority. 
8. Return topsoil and reclaim the area.  
 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

TYPICAL WEED CLEAN-OFF STATION - AIR 

 4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-6b 

 



 

 
CRITERIA FOR IMPLEMENTATION 
 
Weed clean-off stations using high pressure water for cleaning soil from construction equipment, may be set up during nonfrozen 
construction where track cleaning by hand and other weed control measures are determined to be insufficient. Clean-off station 
locations will be determined by the Environmental Inspector prior to commencement of construction in the area. Clean-off 
requirements will apply to all construction equipment involved in topsoil handling operations. Final design should be determined by 
the Chief Inspector, in consultation with the Environmental Inspector, once a location has been determined. 
 

 
 
Notes: 
 
1. During nonfrozen soil conditions, construct the clean-off station for high-pressure water cleaning at an approved location by 

stripping topsoil and constructing containment berms out of subsoil.  
2. Water used for cleaning shall not be allowed to enter any waterbody, wetland or ditch.  
3. Ensure that the size of the station is adequate to accommodate the maximum size of equipment.  
4. Equipment is to consistently enter at one end and exit at another 
5. Skids are to be cleaned between pieces of equipment. 
6. The depression will be backfilled with bermed material. Any soils contaminated by petroleum-based or other undesirable 

materials from clean-off stations shall be removed in accordance with applicable requirements. 
7. Topsoil will be returned and the area reclaimed.  
 
 
 
 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

TYPICAL WEED CLEAN-OFF STATION - HIGH PRESSURE WATER 

 4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-6c 

 



 

Notes: 

1. Acquire and mark additional temporary workspace. 

2. Salvage topsoil from bellhole, spoil storage area and the work/travel lane. On well-sodded lands, restrict topsoil salvage to the 
general bellhole area and store spoil on sod. During frozen conditions, only strip area to be excavated.  

3. Install subsoil ditch ramps. 

4. Excavate bellhole. Store spoil on opposite side of right-of-way from topsoil or adjacent to topsoil maintaining adequate 
separation to avoid admixing topsoil and spoil. 

5. After completion of pipe tie-ins, backfill and compact. Leave a crown to allow for subsidence. 

6. Remove ditch ramps. 

7. Replace topsoil. 

8. Reseed and fertilize as appropriate. 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

MATERIALS HANDLING AT ROAD AND RAIL BORES 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-7 

 



 

Notes: 

1. As directed by the Chief Inspector and approved by the landowner, build a shoo-fly to minimize disturbance along the 
right-of-way. 

2. Stake and clear extra temporary workspace for material storage, if required. 

3. Salvage topsoil from areas of the right-of-way to be graded. 

4. Make the cut on the high side of the right-of-way and place the grade spoil on the low side of the right-of-way. Install the pipe in the 
cut, not in the fill. Note, to do this, the direction of work may need to be reversed along the sidehill slope. 

5. Employ erosion control measures such as trench breakers and subdrains, if warranted. 

6. Leave breaks in the trench crown at frequent intervals on sidehill sloped terrain. 

7. Use a backhoe to assist dozers with replacing cuts. Do not trespass off construction right-of-way. Recontour to a 3:1 grade 
unless otherwise directed by geotechnical engineer. 

8. Replace topsoil on disturbed areas of the right-of-way. 

9. Apply seed and fertilizer as required. 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

SIDEHILL GRADING 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-8 

 



 
The location of flood and pivot irrigated lands are identified on the Environmental Alignment Sheets. 
 
Note:  During frozen conditions, minimize the time the trench is left open to avoid backfilling frozen spoil. 
 
Flood Irrigation Lands 
 
1. Prepare a surveyed right-of-way profile prior to construction on flood irrigated lands. The survey will be used in restoring 

these lands to their pre-construction contours so that irrigation operations are not disrupted following reclamation. 
 
2. Install trench breakers on flood irrigated lands, where warranted due to the presence of slopes, to force groundwater 

seepage along the pipeline trench to the surface. 
 
3. If constructing during frozen conditions on flood irrigated lands, install temporary sack trench breakers on long slopes, where 

warranted. 
 
4. Remove, during final clean-up, the upper 0.75 m of any temporary sack trench breakers installed during the winter. 
 
5. Backfill the trench on flood irrigated land in two (minimum) separate lifts. Compact after each lift.  
 
6. Ensure that no trench crown is left on flood irrigated lands and that right-of-way and border dikes are returned to their 

preconstruction profile. 
 
7. Inspect and monitor the trench before and during the first irrigation season to determine the success of the trench 

compaction and right-of-way profile restoration. 
 
Pivot Irrigation Lands 
 
1. Backfill the trench on pivot irrigated lands using appropriate trench compaction measures to avoid trench subsidence and to 

ensure grades are restored to preconstruction profile. Special attention to the pivot wheel crossing locations will be required 
to avoid future disruption of irrigation equipment operation. This may include compacting in lifts at these locations or the 
installation of a special crossing plate or other bridging material, if approved by landowner. 

 
2. Inspect and monitor the trench before and during the first irrigation season to determine the success of the trench 

compaction and leveling. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

IRRIGATED LANDS 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-9 

 



 

Activity: Notes: 
 

1. Strip and 
Stockpile Topsoil 

- Blade width topsoil stripping is to be conducted on well-sodded hay land, pasture, native prairie, 
bush-pasture and bush lands during both nonfrozen and frozen conditions as indicated on the 
Environmental Alignment Sheets. 

- Salvage topsoil from a strip approximately three times the width of the trench centred over the 
trench line. Area stripped should be sufficiently wide to accommodate the track of the ditcher. 

- Increase topsoil stripping width at locations where trench sloughing may occur; stockpile topsoil a 
greater distance from the trench at these sites. 

- Stockpile topsoil on work side and flatten to allow set-up of pipe. Windrowing of salvaged topsoil 
material on the spoil side is also acceptable. 

- Topsoil stripping requires accurate depth control of a road grader or equivalent machine to ensure 
that subsoils and topsoils are accurately separated. Strip topsoil to colour change. 

- Limit topsoil stripping activities during frozen conditions to specialized equipment capable of 
accurately separating topsoil from subsoil. 

- Suspend stripping during periods of high winds if soil drifting begins to occur or during excessively 
wet conditions. 

- Leave breaks in the topsoil windrow at obvious drainage courses. 
2. Excavate Trench 

and Stockpile 
- Place spoil on the spoil side of the trench. Maintain at least 1 m separation between topsoil and 

subsoil. 
3. Backfill Trench - Backfill and compact trench. Crown the trench, as warranted, to allow for settlement. 

- Avoid mixing subsoil with topsoil. Also avoid scalping sod layer by using a Prairie Protector, if 
necessary, or other piece of equipment capable of fine depth control. 

- Pick stones and debris from the trench area equivalent to the surrounding subsoil. 
4. Replace Topsoil 

and Clean-up 
- Evenly replace topsoil with grader or equivalent machine. Avoid scalping sod layer. Use Prairie 

Protector or Prairie Sweeper to minimize scalping of sod on native prairie if scalping is excessive. 
- Suspend replacement activities during periods of high winds if soil drifting begins to occur or during 

excessively wet conditions. 
- Pick stones equivalent to the surrounding topsoil. 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

TOPSOIL SALVAGE – BLADE WIDTH 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-10 

 



 

Activity: Notes: 
1. Strip and Stockpile 

Topsoil 
- Conduct trench and spoil pile area topsoil stripping on cultivated lands during nonfrozen 

conditions. Strip the trench and spoil area on other land uses such as native prairie, hay, 
pasture, bush-pasture and bush lands as field circumstances dictate using Figure 6A-1 as a 
guide.  

- Topsoil stripping requires accurate depth control of a grader or equivalent machine to ensure 
that subsoils and topsoils are accurately separated. Multiple passes are preferred to a single 
pass.  

- Store topsoil on edge of spoil side of right-of-way. Storing topsoil on the work side and 
flattening it down to set pipe on is acceptable provided there is no mixing. 

- Suspend stripping during periods of high winds or when soils are excessively wet. 
- Leave breaks in the topsoil windrow at obvious drainage courses. 

2. Excavate Trench 
and Stockpile 

- Maintain at least 1 m separation between topsoil and subsoil. 
3. Backfill Trench  - Backfill and compact trench. Crown the trench to allow for settlement. Leave breaks in the 

crown at obvious drainages. 
- Avoid mixing subsoil with topsoil. 

4. Replace Topsoil 
and Clean-up 

- Pick rocks and debris from the trench area equivalent to the surrounding subsoil prior to 
topsoil replacement on agricultural lands. 

- Evenly replace topsoil with grader or equivalent machine. 
- Suspend replacement activities during periods of high winds if soil drifting begins to occur or 

when soils are excessively wet. 
- Pick rocks and debris equivalent to the surrounding topsoil.  

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

TOPSOIL SALVAGE – TRENCH AND SPOIL AREA 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-11 

 



 

Activity: Notes: 
 

1. Strip and Stockpile 
Topsoil 

- Salvage topsoil from over the proposed trench, spoil storage and work areas during 
nonfrozen conditions as field circumstances dictate using Figure 6A-1 as a guide. Topsoil 
storage on both sides of the right-of-way adjacent to the stripped area, as shown is preferred, 
however, storage of all salvaged topsoil on one side of the right-of-way is also acceptable. 

- Topsoil stripping requires accurate depth control of a grader or equivalent machine to ensure 
that subsoils and topsoils are accurately separated.  

- Suspend stripping during periods of high winds or during excessively wet conditions when 
soils are saturated. 

- Leave breaks in the topsoil windrow at obvious drainage courses. 
  
2. Excavate Trench and 

Stockpile 
- Maintain at least 1 m separation between topsoil and subsoil piles. 

  
3. Backfill Trench - Backfill and compact trench. Crown the trench to allow for settlement. Leave breaks in the 

crown at obvious drainages. 
- Avoid mixing subsoil with topsoil. 

  
4. Replace Topsoil and 

Clean-up 
- Rip compacted subsoils, if present, prior to topsoil replacement. 
- Ensure ripper teeth are of equal length. Disc subsoil if very lumpy prior to topsoil 

replacement. 
- Pick rocks and debris from the trench area equivalent to the surrounding subsoil prior to 

topsoil replacement on agricultural lands. 
- Evenly replace topsoil with grader or equivalent machine. 
- Suspend replacement activities during periods of high winds if soil drifting begins to occur or 

during excessively wet conditions when soils are saturated. 
- Pick rocks and debris equivalent to the surrounding topsoil. 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

TOPSOIL SALVAGE – FULL RIGHT-OF-WAY 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-12 

 



 

Activity: Notes: 

1. Strip and Stockpile 
Topsoil 

- Trench and work lane topsoil stripping is to be conducted on well-sodded hay and pasture 
lands, wooded lands and native prairie as described in Figure 6A-1. 

- Salvage topsoil from a strip approximately three times the width of the trench centered over the 
trench line. Strip should be sufficiently wide to accommodate the track of the ditcher. 

- Increase topsoil stripping width at locations where trench sloughing may occur, stockpile topsoil 
a greater distance from the trench at these sites. 

- Stockpile topsoil on work side. Salvage topsoil from the work/travel lane and store in the pipe 
set-up area or on the passing lane side. Windrowing of salvaged topsoil material on the spoil 
side is also acceptable. 

- Topsoil stripping requires accurate depth control of a road grader or equivalent machine to 
ensure that subsoils and topsoils are accurately separated. Multiple passes are preferred to a 
single pass. Strip topsoil to colour change.  

- Suspend stripping during periods of high winds if soil drifting begins to occur or soils are 
excessively wet. 

- Leave breaks in topsoil pile at obvious drainage courses. 

2. Excavate Trench 
and Stockpile 

- Place spoil on the spoil side of the trench. Maintain at least 1 m separation between topsoil and 
subsoil. 

3. Backfill Trench - Backfill and pack trench. Crown trench as required to allow for settlement of fill. 
- Avoid mixing subsoil with topsoil. Also avoid scalping sod layer. 
- Pick stones and debris from the trench area equivalent to the surrounding subsoil. 

4. Replace Topsoil 
and Clean-up 

- Evenly replace topsoil with grader or equivalent machine. Avoid scalping sod layer. 
- Suspend replacement activities during periods of high winds if soil drifting begins to occur or 

soils are excessively wet. 
- Cultivate disturbed part of the right-of-way. 
- Pick stones equivalent to the surrounding topsoil. 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

TOPSOIL SALVAGE – TRENCH AND WORK LANE 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-13 

 



 

 

 
CRITERIA FOR IMPLEMENTATION 
 
Reduced stripping width procedures will be employed in localized sensitive areas during frozen or nonfrozen conditions. 
 
Notes: 
 
1. Minimize traffic in the localized sensitive area. 

2. Spread straw on the topsoil storage area to a sufficient thickness to minimize the risk of disturbance to the sod layer during 
topsoil replacement. 

3. Salvage topsoil from the trenchline only. The work side topsoil pile may be flattened down to allow pipe to be set up on the 
salvaged topsoil. Stripping depth should be 15 cm, to colour change or as indicated on the Environmental Alignment Sheets. 

4. Spread straw under the spoil pile area to a sufficient thickness to minimize the risk of disturbance to the sod layer during 
backfilling. Ensure that straw is free of weeds. 

5. Excavate trench subsoil and store on straw that has been spread on the spoil side adjacent to the trench. 

6. Complete lowering-in activities. 

7. Backfill and compact trench to avoid having to feather excess spoil. Crown the trench, if warranted, to allow for settlement. 
Avoid mixing subsoil with topsoil and avoid scalping the sod layer. Leave remaining straw on undisturbed sod layer. 

8. Evenly replace topsoil over the stripped area. Leave remaining straw and avoid scalping the sod layer.  

 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

TOPSOIL SALVAGE - REDUCED SALVAGE WIDTH 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-14 

 



Profile A - Nonfrozen 

 
Profile B - Frozen 

 

Activity: 
Notes: 

1. Strip and Stockpile 
Topsoil 

- Strip and stockpile topsoil and subsoil first-lift as shown above. Profile A is to be employed 
during nonfrozen soil conditions; Profile B, during frozen soil conditions. 

- Storing topsoil on the work side is an acceptable practice provided that mixing with subsoil is 
prevented. 

2. Excavate Trench and 
Stockpile 

- Excavate first-lift of subsoil to the depth indicated on the Environmental Alignment Sheets 
unless otherwise specified by the Environmental Inspector and stockpile as shown above. 
Note: a bulldozer may be needed to move this subsoil to allow room for windrowing and 
subsequent backfilling of the second subsoil lift. 

- The width of the upper subsoil lift (subsoil first-lift) should be twice the width of the lower 
trench. 

- Excavate remainder of subsoil and stockpile as shown above. 
- Maintain at least 1 m separation between all stockpiles. 

3. Backfill Trench - Return second-lift of trench spoil to the trench and compact. Scalp upper subsoil base under 
second-lift of trench spoil during backfilling to ensure that all second-lift subsoil is returned to 
the trench. 

- Return first-lift of subsoil to the trench and compact. Avoid mixing upper subsoil with topsoil 
during backfill during nonfrozen conditions and snow with topsoil during frozen conditions. 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

THREE-LIFT SOILS HANDLING - ON WELL-SODDED LAND 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-15 

 



Profile A - Nonfrozen 

 
Profile B - Frozen 

 

Activity: Notes: 
1. Strip and Stockpile 

Topsoil 
- Strip and stockpile topsoil and subsoil first-lift as shown above during nonfrozen conditions (Profile 

A) and, if warranted, during frozen conditions (Profile B). 
- Topsoil stripping in frozen conditions requires specialized equipment capable of accurately 

salvaging frozen topsoil. 
- Storing topsoil on the work side is an acceptable practice provided that mixing with subsoil is 

prevented. 
2. Excavate Trench 

and Stockpile 
- Excavate first-lift of subsoil to the depth indicated on the Environmental Alignment Sheets unless 

otherwise specified by the Environmental Inspector and stockpile as shown above. Note: a 
bulldozer may be needed to move this subsoil to allow room for windrowing and subsequent 
backfilling of the second subsoil lift. 

- The width of the upper subsoil lift (subsoil first-lift) should be twice the width of the lower trench. 
- Excavate remainder of subsoil and stockpile as shown above. 
- Maintain at least 1 m separation between all soil stockpiles. 

3. Backfill Trench - Return second-lift of trench spoil to the trench and compact. Scalp upper subsoil base under 
second lift of trench spoil during backfilling to ensure that all second lift subsoil is returned to the 
trench. 

- Return first-lift of subsoil to the trench and compact. Avoid mixing upper subsoil with topsoil during 
backfill during nonfrozen conditions and with snow and topsoil during frozen conditions. 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

THREE-LIFT SOILS HANDLING - ON CULTIVATED LAND 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-16 

 



 

 

Activity: Notes:  

1. Strip and Stockpile 
Topsoil 

- Trench, spoil and work lane topsoil stripping is to be conducted on well-sodded hay and 
pasture lands, bush and native prairie as described in Figure 6A-1. 

- Increase topsoil stripping width at locations where trench sloughing may occur, stockpile 
topsoil a greater distance from the trench at these sites. 

- Stockpile topsoil from the trench and spoil area on the spoil side. Salvage topsoil from the 
work/travel lane and store in the pipe set-up area or on the passing lane side. 

- Topsoil stripping requires accurate depth control of a road grader or equivalent machine to 
ensure that subsoils and topsoils are accurately separated. Multiple passes are preferred 
to a single pass. Strip topsoil to colour change.  

- Suspend stripping during periods of high winds if soil drifting begins to occur or soils are 
excessively wet. 

- Leave breaks in topsoil pile at obvious drainage courses. 
2. Excavate Trench and 

Stockpile 
- Place spoil on the spoil side of the trench. Maintain at least 1 m separation between topsoil 

and subsoil. 
3. Backfill Trench - Backfill and pack trench. Crown trench as required to allow for settlement of fill. 

- Avoid mixing subsoil with topsoil. Also avoid scalping sod layer. 
- Pick stones and debris from the trench area equivalent to the surrounding subsoil. 

4. Replace Topsoil and 
Clean-up 

- Evenly replace topsoil with grader or equivalent machine. Avoid scalping sod layer. 
- Suspend replacement activities during periods of high winds if soil drifting begins to occur 

or soils are excessively wet. 
- Cultivate disturbed part of the right-of-way. 
- Pick stones equivalent to the surrounding topsoil. 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

TOPSOIL SALVAGE – TRENCH, SPOIL AND WORK LANE 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-17 

 



 
CRITERIA FOR IMPLEMENTATION 
 
The topsoil windrow will be tackified on wind erodible soils, where other erosion control measures (such as storing topsoil in low 
profile windrows and packing or the application of snow or water) are not feasible or effective. Locations where tackifier will be used 
will be determined during construction by the Environmental Inspector. 
 
Notes: 
 
1. Tackifier will be applied as specified by Enbridge. 
 
2. Tackifier will be biodegradable and non-toxic. 
 
3. Apply tackifier on topsoil windrow immediately following stripping or immediately after identification of wind erosion potential. 
 
4. Apply tackifier at the manufacturer’s recommended rate using a boom sprayer or cannon sprayer capable of providing even 

surface coverage of the entire topsoil windrow. 
 
5. Avoid disturbance to the topsoil windrow after tackifier has been applied. 
 
6. Reapply tackifier if disturbance of the topsoil windrow occurs and the potential for wind erosion reoccurs. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

TACKIFY TOPSOIL WINDROW 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-18 

 



 

Notes: 

1. Install a subdrain to divert shallow groundwater flow away from the pipeline, to improve slope stability. Clean gravel and a 
filter cloth ditch liner, permits drainage aiding in retention of backfill. In certain circumstances, a parallel drain may be 
installed lengthwise down the slope underneath the pipeline. A geotechnical engineer can advise as to which method is most 
appropriate. 

2. Install trench breaker downslope of drain, where drains cross pipeline trench, to prevent drain water flowing down pipe 
trench. 

3. Determine the location of drain by on-site investigation considering such factors as groundwater conditions in trench, soil 
types, local topography, and drainage patterns. Discharge may either be off right-of-way on the downslope side of the 
subdrain (see Subdrain Exit "A"), or on right-of-way downslope of the berm (see Subdrain Exit "B"). Special permission will be 
required from the appropriate regulatory authority and landowner to construct a subdrain exit off right-of-way. Ensure 
discharge is into a well protected area with gravel, riprap or vegetation. 

4. Skew cross drain 5o off horizontal to ensure sufficient drainage. 

5. The above drawing is a schematic diagram. A geotechnical engineer should be consulted for the detailed site specific drain 
design and the incorporation of the trench breaker. 

 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

SUBDRAIN 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-19 

 



 

Notes: 

1. Install trench breakers to control water seepage along the trench line and prevent erosion of backfill materials. 
2. Trench breakers may be constructed using earth filled sacks, bentonite, foam or equivalent materials to provide a barrier to 

water seepage. 
3. The drawings above provide a schematic representation of trench breaker installation. Final locations and design of trench 

breakers will be determined by the project engineer based on site specific conditions at the time of construction. 
4. Dig keys into trench bottom and sides to the extent feasible for added stability. 
5. Install a prefabricated drain or a layer of sand or gravel covered with filter cloth over the breaker. 
6. Backfill native material and mark location of breaker. 
7. Ensure cross ditches are located over the end of the drain. 
8. Construct diversion berms downslope from the breaker but not over the end of the drain. 
9. Ensure that trench crown does not encroach upon the breaker drain or cross ditch. 
10. Backfill trench on downslope side of breaker before upslope side. 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

TRENCH BREAKERS / DITCH PLUGS 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-20 

 



 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

SPRING CLEAN-UP 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-21a 



 

 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

SPRING CLEAN-UP 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-21b 

 



 
CRITERIA FOR IMPLEMENTATION 
 
Where right-of-way recontouring and topsoil replacement are delayed until after spring break-up, the following measures will be 
implemented, as directed by the Environmental Inspector. 
 
Notes: 
 
1. Identify locations where cross drainage is needed. If feasible, consult with landowners to confirm locations where cross-

drainage is needed. 
 
2. Ensure grade material is well packed into its present position. 
 
3. Create frequent breaks in the topsoil windrow at low areas, mid-slope and at obvious cross-drainage swales. 
 
4. Compact the trench backfill downslope of the windrow breaks for a distance of at least 10 m using a compaction wheel or 

backhoe bucket. Install a temporary berm across the trench to minimize the channeling of any surface water flow. 
 
5. Lay geotextile matting across the right-of-way through the windrow break. Ensure the matting provides drainage onto, across 

and off the work area. 
 
6. Stake geotextile in place according to manufacturer's instructions. 
 
7. Apply tackifier to the topsoil windrow. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

DELAYED GRADE / TOPSOIL REPLACEMENT - PROTECTION FROM SOIL EROSION 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-22 

 



Notes: 
 
1. Install diversion berm and cross ditch on moderate and steep slopes to divert surface water off the right-of-way. Install berms 

immediately downslope of trench breakers to collect seepage forced to the surface. 
2. Skew berm across the right-of-way at downhill gradient of 5-10%. 
3. Construct diversion berm of compacted native subsoils where extensive disturbance of the sod layer has occurred. Diversion 

berms should be constructed of timbers, imported logs or sandbags if disturbance of the sod layer is limited. Avoid use of 
organic material. Where native material is highly erodible, protect upslope of berm and base of cross ditch by burying a 
geotextile liner 16-20 cm below the surface or armour upslope face of berm with earth-filled sand bags.  

4. Typical diversion berm height and widths are approximately 0.75 m. Enbridge shall inspect berms after heavy rains and the 
first spring following construction; replace or restore berms, if warranted. 

5. Leave a break in trench crown immediately upslope of diagonal berm and cross ditch to allow passage of water across the 
right-of-way. 

6. Use diagonal berms where direction of slope and surface water movement is oblique to pipeline right-of-way. 
7. Use herringbone berm and cross ditch where direction of slope and surface water movement is parallel to right-of-way so 

runoff does not cross ditch line. 
8. Determine location and direction of berm based on local topography and drainage patterns. Also install berms immediately 

downslope of trench breakers. Skew berms with downhill gradient of 5-10%. 
9. Typical diversion berm spacing is indicated below. 

   
Slope Gradient (o ;%) Typical Spacing (m) Erosion Hazard*   

 
<7; <12 

7; 12 
8; 14 
9; 16 

11; 19 
14; 25 
18; 33 
27; 50 

High 
30-45 

25 
22 
19 
16 
12 
9 
6 

Medium 
45-60 

38 
33 
29 
24 
18 
14 
9 

Low 
60 or more 

51 
44 
38 
32 
24 
18 
12 

 

* High = fine sand silts; medium = clays and coarse sands; low = rock or gravel 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

CROSS DITCHES AND DIVERSION BERMS 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-23 

 



 
 

Notes: 
1. Watercourses that have moderate to high sensitivity of fish habitat and/or have steep approach slopes at the proposed 

crossings may need silt fences during construction, as determined by the Environmental Inspector. 

2. Install silt fences at the base of approach slopes following clearing and grading using the method and materials above or 
other approved designs. 

3. Ensure silt fence is keyed into the substrate. Excavate a narrow trench, place the base of the silt fence in the trench and 
place the fill back into the trench, securing the silt fence in place. 

4. Place silt fences a minimum 2 m, if feasible, from the toe of the slope in order to increase ponding volume. 

5. Maintain silt fences throughout construction. 

6. Ensure that silt fences, if removed or damaged, are reinstalled or repaired prior to the end of the work day. 

7. Maintain silt fences in place at the base of the approach slopes until revegetation of the right-of-way is complete. 

8. In areas with frequent traffic, install two or more silt fences in a staggered and overlapped configuration to allow vehicle 
passage without removal or opening of the silt fence. 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

SILT FENCE INSTALLATION 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-24 

 



 
 

Notes: 

1. Install a temporary bridge (e.g., log, prefabricated span) to allow vehicles to cross watercourses that are sensitive or that 
have unstable bed and banks. Bridges are also used where watercourses are too deep, wide or fast to permit an alternative 
crossing structure. This method minimizes sedimentation of the watercourse, and bank and bed restoration work. It is 
generally limited to watercourses less than 30 m in width. 

2. Utilize approach fills rather than cuts in banks to minimize erosion potential. Do not constrict flow with approach fill or support 
structures. Ensure adequate free-board to handle anticipated streamflows. Use a geotextile liner to prevent fine material from 
entering watercourse. 

3. Remove bridge immediately after use. If bridge is to remain in place through spring break-up to access final clean-up, it must 
be designed for spring floods and ice jams. Remove support structures and approach fills. Restore and stabilize banks. 

4. Install curb stringers of logs or plywood to ensure that fill material does not spill into the watercourse, where required. 

Adapted from CAPP et al. (2005) 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

VEHICLE CROSSING - TYPICAL TEMPORARY BRIDGE 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-25 

 



 

Notes: 

1. Use swamp mats to provide vehicular access across relatively shallow or dry and narrow watercourses with stable banks. 
Where water depth, streambed composition or banks slopes could pose trafficability problems for rubber tired vehicles, limit 
swamp mat traffic to tracked equipment. 

2. Minimize grading in proximity to watercourse. Grade and grub only along the trenchline and an area immediately adjacent to 
the trench line. Pull soil and debris away from watercourse, if banks require sloping. 

3. Minimize use of crossing. 

4. Stabilize banks and approaches with granular blanket underlain by a geotextile, if warranted. 

5. Mark boundaries on both sides of crossing to confine all vehicle traffic to swamp mats. 

6. Restore and stabilize beds and banks to original contour when crossing is no longer needed. Granular blanket need not be 
removed if it is not a barrier to fish during low flow conditions. 

 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

VEHICLE CROSSING - TYPICAL SWAMP MAT FORD 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-26 

 



 

Notes: 

1. Install ice bridges during winter construction when a safe ice thickness can be maintained.  

2. Locate ice bridges at sites with gently sloping banks to minimize cuts in watercourse banks. Use snow and ice to slope 
approaches, rather than cut banks. 

3. Flood ice surface with water and cover with snow to increase load bearing capacity. Logs may be used as a base to strengthen 
the bridge. The ice bridge should not impede flow.  

4. Maintain ice regularly and remove all debris from the ice surface. 

5. Remove broken ice from trench area to prevent ice jamming against and under the ice bridge. 

6. Remove logs and breach ice bridge by physical means prior to spring break-up. 

7. Restore and stabilize banks and approaches prior to spring break-up. 
 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

VEHICLE CROSSING - TYPICAL ICE BRIDGE 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-27 

 



 

Notes: 

1. Install ice bridges during winter construction when a safe ice thickness can be maintained.  

2. Locate ice bridges at sites with gently sloping banks to minimize cuts in watercourse banks. Use snow and ice to slope 
approaches, rather than cut banks. 

3. Fill with snow to increase load bearing capacity. Logs may be used as a base to strengthen the bridge. The snow fill should 
not impede flow.  

4. Maintain snow fill regularly and remove all debris from the surface. 

5. Remove broken ice from trench area to prevent ice jamming against and under the snow fill. 

6. Remove logs and breach snow fill by physical means prior to spring break-up. 

7. Restore and stabilize banks and approaches prior to spring break-up. 
 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

VEHICLE CROSSING - SNOW FILL 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-28 

 



 

Notes: 

1. Install ramp and culverts to allow vehicles to cross relatively narrow watercourses where sedimentation must be minimized or 
fish passage allowed. 

2. Design culverts to handle 150% of maximum anticipated flows or to a five year flood level and according to specific 
guidelines where fish passage (i.e., migration) is required. Contact government authorities for minimum water depth 
specifications, and maximum water velocities. Ensure dam is impermeable. 

3. Place ends of culverts below the natural grade of watercourse at an angle that does not exceed normal watercourse gradient. 
Depth of placement is dependent upon bed type, culvert size and expected flow conditions. 

4. Remove temporary culverts and ramp materials when no longer required. Remove culvert and ramp prior to freeze-up 
(summer construction) and prior to spring break-up (winter construction). 

5. Restore and stabilize bed and banks. 
 
Source: Adapted from CAPP et al. (2005) 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

VEHICLE CROSSING - TYPICAL RAMP AND CULVERT 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-29 

 



 
Notes: 

1. Install vehicle crossing if warranted. 

2.  Install sediment and erosion control structures, as required. 

3. Leave plugs at end of standard trench.  

4. Complete construction of the instream pipe section. Weight pipe, if warranted, prior to commencement of instream activity. 

5. Trench through watercourse retaining hard plugs back from each bank until just prior to pipe installation. Stockpile all 
instream spoil on banks. Construct berms (e.g., subsoil, saddle weights, shotrock) to prevent saturated spoil from flowing 
back into watercourse. 

6. Lower-in and backfill immediately. Restore stream channel to approximate preconstruction profile and substrate. Attempt to 
complete all instream activity within 24 hours. 

7. If necessary to control water flow and trench sloughing, install temporary soft plugs and dewater trench on to stable 
vegetated land, not directly to watercourse. 

8. Restore, stabilize and reclaim watercourse banks and approaches to as close to preconstruction grade as practical.  
Source: Adapted from CAPP et al. 2005 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

WATERCOURSE CROSSING – OPEN CUT OF SMALL WATERCOURSES 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-30 

 



 

 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

WATERCOURSE CROSSING – ISOLATION: FLUME 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-31a 



 
Notes: 
 
1. Install the vehicle crossing, if required, on the work side edge of the right-of-way to allow for a wide excavation. 

2. Size flume to handle anticipated flows. 

3. Stockpile all required materials prior to beginning instream work. Complete construction of the instream pipe section. Weight 
and pretest pipe, if warranted, prior to commencing instream activity. 

4. Install a pre-assembled flume, or construct a flume and install both an upstream and downstream dam. 

5. Install additional erosion control, if required, downstream of the flume outlet. 

6. Ensure a tight seal about the dam and flume prior to undertaking trench excavation. Beginning in the early morning, excavate 
the trench as quickly as practical placing spoil out of the stream channel. Create spoil containment sumps or berms, if 
warranted, to keep spoil from flowing back into the stream channel. 

7. Pump excavation as required to prevent downstream flow of silted water. Direct the pumped water onto vegetated areas well 
back from the watercourse. Construct water containment sumps, if warranted. 

8. Install pipe. 

9. Backfill the stream channel first, squeezing the silted water into the bank excavations. Pump or drain the bank excavations 
while progressively backfilling from the stream channel outward. 

10. Complete backfill and stabilize bed, leaving a small shallow (< 0.5 m) sump upstream of the downstream dam. Install a pump 
intake in this sump. 

11. Slowly elevate corner of flume (or edge of dam) and/or shut down auxiliary bypass pumps, and allow isolated channel to be 
flushed with water. Silt-laden water will flow into the shallow sump and then be pumped onto well-vegetated area. 

12. Once isolated channel is flushed, remove downstream seal materials. 

13. Remove upstream seal materials. 

14. Remove the flume. 

15. Restore, stabilize and reclaim banks of stream channel to preconstruction profiles. 
 
Adapted from CAPP et al. (2005) 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

WATERCOURSE CROSSING – ISOLATION: FLUME 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-31b 

 



 
 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

WATERCOURSE CROSSING – ISOLATION: DAM AND PUMP 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-32a 



 
Notes: 
 
1. Install the vehicle crossing on the work side edge of the right-of-way to all for a wide excavation. 
2. Stockpile all necessary materials and equipment onsite prior to beginning instream work. 
3. Complete construction of the instream pipe section. Weight, coat and pretest pipe, if warranted, prior to commencement of 

instream activity. 
4. Begin the operation in the early morning to allow for same day installation if practical. 
5. Install pumps and check operation to equalize flow. Screen pump intakes with screen openings no larger than 2.54 mm. Size 

the screen to ensure that water approach velocities do not result in entrainment or entrapment of fish. 
6. Construct the upstream dam. Dam should be constructed on the edge of the temporary workspace to allow for a wide 

excavation. Ensure dam is impermeable by installing a polyethylene liner. Dam may be constructed with sand bags, 
aquadam, sheet piling or other approved material that ensures a tight seal of the bed and banks. 

7. Plug the vehicle crossing culvert or construct the downstream dam. Where a bridge is used, the dam should be constructed 
as close to the edge of the temporary workspace as practical to allow for a wide excavation. 

8. Salvage the upper 0.5 m (minimum) of clean granular material, if present, and stockpile separately from the remainder of the 
trench spoil. 

9. Excavate trench as rapidly as practical. Create spoil containment sumps, if warranted, to keep spoil from flowing back into 
the stream channel. 

10. Install pipe. 
11. Backfill the stream channel first pushing the silted water back into the bank excavations. Pump or drain the bank excavations 

while progressively backfilling from the stream channel outward. Construct water containment sumps if warranted. 
12. Cap the upper 0.5 m (minimum) of the trench with the salvaged clean granular material. 
13. Remove any accumulations of silt and sediment from the streambed. 
14. Restore the banks of the stream channel to preconstruction profiles. 
15. Remove the downstream dam or vehicle crossing plug then remove the upstream dam or vehicle crossing plug. 
 

Source: Adapted from CAPP et al. 2005 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

WATERCOURSE CROSSING – ISOLATION: DAM AND PUMP 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-32b 

 



 

Notes: 
1. Install vehicle crossing, if required, on the work side edge of the right-of-way to allow for a wide excavation.  
2. Ensure adequate electric power supply and adequately sized pumps to handle anticipated flow. Have standby pumps and 

generators capable of handling 100% of anticipated flow onsite and ready to be used if the operating pumps fail. 
3. Install high volume pump in pool located upstream of the excavation. Excavate temporary upstream sump in the right-of-way 

if no natural pool exits. Add additional pumping capacity if required. Discharge water through or into an energy dissipator into 
the channel sufficiently downstream of the trench to prevent water flowing back into the excavation. 

4. Immediately initiate fish salvage from isolated pools. Ensure fish salvage permit(s) are acquired prior to installing pump. 
5. Excavate a small sump downstream of crossing to collect silt laden waters. Install small pumps in sump and trench to 

discharge silt-laden water on to well vegetated soils away from watercourse. 
6. Excavate trench, complete installation and backfill trench. Move hose if warranted to maintain streamflow. 
7. Wash backfilled trench area into sump. Pump silt-laden water from trench onto a well vegetated area off right-of-way. 

Complete this step each evening prior to shutting off upstream pump, if instream work is to occur on successive days. 

Adapted from CAPP et al. (2005) 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

WATERCOURSE CROSSING – HIGH VOLUME PUMP 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-33 

 
 



 
Notes: 

1. Set up equipment back from the edge of the watercourse; do not clear or grade within buffer zone except along the work 
side, if temporary vehicle crossing is installed. 

2. Excavate bellhole. Store spoil on opposite side of right-of-way. Excavate dewatering sump within bellholes, if warranted. 

3. Complete boring and tie-in to mainline. 

4. Pump bellhole dry if seepage becomes a problem. Dewater bellholes onto stable, vegetated land, not directly back into 
watercourse. 

5. Backfill and compact. Leave a crown to allow for subsidence. 

 
Adapted from CAPP et al. (2005) 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

WATERCOURSE CROSSING – TRENCHLESS: BORE / PUNCH 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-34 

 



 

 
 
 
 
 

Notes: 
 
1. Obtain geotechnical data, if warranted prior to initiating drilling. Drilling may not be feasible in some materials such as 

unconsolidated gravels. 
 
2. Ensure temporary workspace rights have been obtained to conduct monitoring and that access is available for monitoring 

activities. 
 
3. Set up drilling equipment back from the edge of the watercourse; do not clear or grade within the vegetated buffer zone, 

except along the work side, if temporary vehicle crossing is utilized. 
 
4. Employ full time inspectors to observe for an inadvertent mud release into the watercourse. 
 
5. Ensure that only bentonite based drilling mud is used. Do not allow the use of any additives to the drilling mud without the 

approval of appropriate regulatory authorities. 
 
6. Install suitable drilling mud tanks or sumps to prevent contamination of watercourse. 
 
7. Install sumps downslope from the drill entry and anticipated exit points to contain any release of drilling mud. 
 
8. Dispose of drilling mud in accordance with the appropriate regulatory authority requirements. 
 
9. Prepare a drilling mud release contingency plan.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Adapted from CAPP et al. (2005) 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

WATERCOURSE CROSSING – LARGE DIRECTIONAL DRILL  

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-35a 

 



 

 

Adapted from CAPP et al. (2005) 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

WATERCOURSE CROSSING – LARGE DIRECTIONAL DRILL  

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-35b 

 



 

Notes: 

1. If there is a high velocity streamflow, install deflection 
barrier (e.g., median barriers) to permit construction of 
dam outside full streamflow. 

2. Construct dam from local materials, sandbags, 1 m3 
sandbags, water-filled dams, sheet piling, median 
barriers, gravel or other appropriate material to extend 
over halfway across the watercourse. 

3. Install impermeable barrier within dam. 
4. Install riprap on upstream side to protect the dam from 

erosion if dam is constructed of loose material. 
5. Spoil storage shall be above the high water mark or 

protected by erosion control measures to ensure that, 
when the water level rises after all flow has been 
channelized into one channel, spoil is not washed away. 

 
 
Adapted from CAPP et al. (2005) 

6. Install sumps to collect seepage and then pump to 
dewatering area. 

7. Ensure discharge area can handle the volume of water 
and silt pumped to shore. 

8. Complete trenching, lowering in and backfilling. 
9. Remove dam, reconstruct bank. 
10. Repeat process for other channel. 
11. Temporary diversion also may be made through 

abandoned channels as long as steps are taken to 
minimize a flush of sediment once the watercourse is 
redirected through the "new" channel. 

12. Temporary diversion through a channel excavated into a 
flood plain is possible if lined or passed through a flexible 
conduit to prevent excessive erosion along the "new" 
channel. 

 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

WATERCOURSE CROSSING - CHANNEL DIVERSION 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-36 

 



 

 

Notes: 

1. Proper placement and design is critical and qualified specialists should be involved. 
2. Remove all stumps, organic matter and work material and grade/prepare banks to a maximum slope as directed by a 

geotechnical engineer. 
3. Construct toe trench to key in bottom of armour protection, or adopt thickened toe option. 
4. Install filter cloth (geotextile) or gravel filter layer.  
5. Place riprap on slope to be protected such that a well-interlocked, smooth layer is produced. 
6. Riprap should be dense, durable, roughly equidimensional (not flat and thin), angular and clean. 
7. Size of riprap used is dependent upon slope of bank and water velocity. 
8. The minimum thickness of a riprap layer shall be 1.5 to 2 times the approximate dimensions of rock being used. 
9. Key in up and downstream ends of the armoured bank in a manner such that it will not be outflanked. 
10. Riprap should extend 0.5 m (min) above design flood level. If design flood level is above the top of the bank, riprap should be 

placed to the top of the bank. 
11. Riprap should be flush with bank adjacent to the right-of-way. 

Adapted from CAPP et al. (2005) 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

STREAMBANK PROTECTION – RIPRAP ARMOUR 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-37 

 



 

Notes: 
 
Collection 
1. Collect cuttings from local shrubs (e.g., willow, poplar, red osier dogwood) from sites with similar conditions and species 

composition as the proposed receiving site. 
2. Collect live stakes during winter dormancy, when feasible. Collect stems that are healthy, young, single stem, 2-3 cm at the 

base and 150-200 cm in length. 
3. Harvest live stakes using a single clean cut at the base using hand loppers or a skilled chainsaw operator using a sharp 

chain.  
4. Make stakes into bundles of 20 with all base cuts orientated to one end. Firmly tie bundles at the base and top, using 

biodegradable bailing twine.  
5. Protect harvested stakes from drying out; store immediately under cover out of the wind and sun in cool moist conditions.  
 
Installation Sites 
6. Install live stakes at sites that receive prolonged periods of moisture and have some drainage (i.e., moist slopes and 

watercourse banks).  
7.  Use a minimum of one bundle per metre of bank. 
8.  Place butt ends of live stake bundles in water 1 to 2 days prior to installation, if feasible. 
 
Live Stake Installation 
9.  Using a hoe sitting on the upside slope, cut the bucket into the bank working it in as deep as possible (100 cm). Create an 

opening; insert a bundle of live stakes at the base of the cut. Cut the twine and spread the whips apart. Withdraw the hoe 
bucket and tamp down the upside of the cut. Make installations in continuous lines or individually at specific sites.  

10. Prune excess live stake material back to 40 cm above the ground.  
 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

TYPICAL LIVE SHRUB STAKING 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-38a 

 
 



 
Notes: 
1. Install stakes of suitable species (e.g., willow, dogwood) on watercourse banks.  
2. Make clean cuts with unsplit ends using pruning shears, hand saw or chain saw. 
3. Select stock from bottom of branches not tips. 
4. Mark basal ends to ensure correct installation. 
5. Ensure at least one lateral bud above surface and three below. Plant cutting at an angle. 
6. Protect material from drying out. Install as quickly as practical. 
7. Trim side shoots close to main stock. 
8. Use frost pin to make pilot hole. Minimize damage to stake when driving by using a neoprene lined post hole pounder or 

rubber mallet. 
9. Install live stakes on banks and 1.5 m (approximately) back from banks for entire disturbed width of right-of-way. 

 
Notes: 
1. Salvage and replace shrubs on all watercourse banks where shrubs are present on the right-of-way. 
2. Salvage whole bushes from the right-of-way during grading of banks. Ensure bulk of root mass is surrounded by soil. 
3. Store salvaged shrubs on edge of right-of-way, cover with soil and do not let dry out. 
4. Transplant as quickly as practical when reconstructing watercourse banks. 
5. Soak the ground around the transplant with water. 
 
Adapted from CAPP et al.(2005) 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

TYPICAL LIVE SHRUB STAKING 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-38b 

 



 

Notes: 

1. An Environmental Inspector will be onsite to ensure correct placement and design. 

2. At the base of the bank install a base of local cobble or imported rock to above mean water levels or higher. Other 
stabilization techniques can be incorporated including: log structures, coniferous tree revetments, angular rock armouring, 
etc. 

3. To recreate banks, install layers of soil filled biodegradable fabric (coir or equivalent) wraps. To make each layer, roll out the 
fabric parallel with the bank with one-third into the bank and two-thirds out (streamside). Form a step of soil 30-40 cm high 
over the bank side fabric. Fold the stream side fabric over the soil step and firm into place. 

4. Over the fabric wrap arrange locally salvaged live shrub with roots (alder, rose ssp., etc.) with live stake material (willow, 
poplar, red osier dogwood) at 20 stems per metre, incorporate topsoil and firm into place. 

5. Continue building layers of fabric soil wraps and live shrubs until original bank height is reached. 

6. For best results, collect live shrub material during plant dormancy; store in moist conditions and install as soon as feasible. 

Source: Adapted from CAPP et al. (2005) 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

HEDGE / BRUSH LAYERING 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-39 

 



 
CRITERIA FOR IMPLEMENTATION 
 
Machine application of tackifier for soil erosion control will be used at sites specified by the Environmental Inspector following 
approval by the appropriate authorities. 

1. All equipment used for tackifier applications must be fully operational to manufacturer’s specification, free of any 
contaminants, including weeds and chemicals, and be operated by an experienced and qualified crew. 

2. All applications of tackifier must follow individual site specifications provided by the Environmental Inspector and using 
methods and dates recommended by manufacturers. 

3. All products applied will be biodegradable, nontoxic, of organic origin and preapproved by the appropriate land authority. 

4. Seed applications will be made separately and prior to applications of tackifier. 

5. Water withdrawal for applications must be made from an approved source. A valid copy of the water withdrawal permit, 
where applicable, must be available for inspection onsite. 

6. All ground preparations are to be completed prior to tackifier applications. 

7. Where the tackifier application disturbs soils and erosion control installations (i.e., surface berms) repairs will be made 
followed by repeat tackifier applications. 
 

 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

TACKIFIER ON STEEP SLOPES 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-40 

 



 

CRITERIA FOR IMPLEMENTATION 
 
Slash and nonsalvageable timber may be used as rollback for erosion control where available and acceptable to the landowner. 
Specific locations will be determined by the Environmental Inspector at the time of clearing.  
 
Notes: 
 
1. Retain slash and nonsalvageable timber, where required, for use as rollback. 
 
2. Smaller slash (e.g., less than 10 cm in diameter) should be used for rollback as an erosion control measure. 
 
3. The amount of timber retained for use as rollback will be determined by the Chief Inspector in consultation with the 

Environmental Inspector and the landowner. Store material for rollback along the edges of the right-of-way, or in natural 
clearings. 

 
4. Walk down rollback with a dozer on steep slopes, if safe to do so. 
 
5. Leave gaps in the rollback at obvious livestock/wildlife trails. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

ROLLBACK FOR EROSION CONTROL 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-41 

 



 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

EROSION CONTROL MATTING - SLOPES 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-42 

 



 

 
At sites where erosion is a concern and where shrub plantings are required for restoration on non-agricultural lands, locally salvaged 
logs will be used to secure slopes and provide planting sites. 

1. Sites where staked logs are to be installed will be selected by the Environmental Inspector. When possible, sites will be 
selected prior to clearing and suitable local logs will be salvaged and stockpiled for later use. 

2. Install staked logs during clean-up or reclamation phase. Where possible, use a backhoe to cut a step into the slope and 
push in a line of wood stakes. Note: take all necessary safety measures when working in proximity to pipeline. 

3. A qualified chainsaw operator will select and cut to fit suitable logs for horizontals. If necessary, the logs may be secured to 
the stakes using biodegradable rope. 

4. Create a pocket immediately upslope of the horizontally staked logs. The pocket can be used to install live shrub stakes (see 
Detail 6A-38) and backfilled with topsoil. 

5. Where the planting pocket is required for rooted plugs or salvaged plantings, line the pocket with biodegradable fabric 
(burlap or coir). Bring the fabric over the top log. Fill the lined pocket with topsoil and tamp down. Install plants in pockets as 
directed by the Environmental Inspector. 

 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

STAKED LOGS FOR EROSION CONTROL 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-43 

 



 
CRITERIA FOR IMPLEMENTATION 
 
In conjunction with broadcast seeding and tackifying on steep slopes where straw crimping is not feasible, track mounted equipment 
may be used to systematically pack and imprint the seed bed with cleat tracks at locations as directed by the Environmental 
Inspector. 
 
Notes: 
 
1. Track cleat imprinting will be conducted following drill seeding or prior to broadcast seeding to provide a rough surface on 

steep slopes for trapping water in microsites. 
 
2. In some cases, track cleat imprinting may be done prior to tackifier applications. 
 
3. Track cleat imprints will be perpendicular to the fall line of the slope and spaced sufficiently to provide uniform coverage of 

the ground surface. 
 
4. Track cleat imprinting will not be done in locations where safety may be compromised. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

TRACK CLEAT IMPRINTING 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-44 

 



 
CRITERIA FOR IMPLEMENTATION 
 
Straw crimping will be conducted on noncultivated, wind erosion prone soils, and on saline soils where vegetation may be difficult to 
quickly reestablish as identified on the Environmental Alignment Sheets, unless otherwise directed by the Environmental 
Inspector(s). Straw crimping at additional locations identified by the Environmental Inspector may be necessary.  
 
 
Notes: 
 
1. Wheat, barley, flax or rye straw will be used, where appropriate, depending upon availability.  
 
2. Wheat, barley flax or rye straw will be spread over disturbed portions of the construction right-of-way at 2,000-2,500 kg/ha. 

Flax straw, where used, will be spread at 3,000-4,000 kg/ha. 
 
3. Straw will be crimped or anchored into the soil to an approximate depth of 5 cm. Straw should stand vertically 5-20 cm out of 

the ground in rows spaced approximately 15 cm apart. 
 
4. In highly erodible sandy locations, where directed by the Environmental Inspector, the straw application rate will be doubled 

and two passes will be made to anchor the straw, one pass perpendicular to the other or criss-crossed.  
 
5. Where excessive stoniness is encountered to the extent that the crimping operation is not feasible, an attempt will be made 

to anchor the straw by incorporation with an agricultural disc or cultivator. 
 
6. Straw for crimping will be approved by Enbridge as well as the landowners and occupants, or appropriate regulatory 

authorities where applicable. Criteria for the selection of straw are as follows: 
 

• for each lot of bales, the field where the bales were obtained will be inspected to the extent feasible, either before it is 
harvested or the stubble will be inspected immediately after harvest and a sample of grain will be inspected for weed 
seeds. 

 
• the straw must have been harvested with a conventional combine, not a rotary combine; 

 
• the straw must have a minimum fiber length of 30 cm, preferably longer; 

 
• the straw must be free of Noxious or Restricted weeds and undesirable species which will hamper reclamation efforts; 

and 
 

• to the extent feasible, bales obtained from low-lying weedy areas will be identified and avoided. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

STRAW CRIMPING 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-45 

 



 
 

 
CRITERIA FOR IMPLEMENTATION 
 
Seed mixes (see table below) will be seeded at locations indicated on the Environmental Alignment Sheets, unless otherwise 
requested by landowners or land authority. 
 
Notes: 
 
1. Drill native seed mixes (Mixes 1 to 6) at 10 kg/ha and non-native seed mixes (Mixes 7 to 12) at 15 kg/ha (Detail 6A-47). Use 

double the specified rate for broadcast seeding (Detail 6A-48).  
 
2. Species cultivars, where applicable, will be determined at the time of procurement based on availability and suitability as 

determined by Enbridge. 
 
3. Native seed species will be obtained from local sources to the extent feasible.  
 
4. All seed mixes must have certificates of analysis for weed and undesirable species content, and germination tests for each 

lot of each species in the mix. 
 
5. Certificates of analysis for all seed lots will be reviewed by Enbridge prior to purchase. Any lot with unacceptable weed 

contamination or viability will be rejected. 
 
6. Seed mix species that are unavailable in sufficient quantity or quality at a reasonable cost as determined by Enbridge at the 

time of procurement will be eliminated from the mix and the proportions of other species in the mix increased. 
 
7. An annual or biennial cover crop will be seeded in addition to the specified seed mix as directed by the Environmental 

Inspector(s) (Detail 6A-49). Cover crops are to be seeded at a rate of 20-30 kg/ha if drill seeded and 40-60 kg/ha if 
broadcast seeded. Cover crop species may include annual ryegrass, winter wheat, fall rye, slender/awned wheatgrass, 
Canada wild rye, hairy wild rye or triticale. 

 
8. Road ditches will be seeded with the seed mix sown on the adjacent lands. In ditches adjacent to cultivated lands, use the 

appropriate non-native seed mix (see below).  
 
See Detail 6A-47 for procedures related to drill seeding and see Detail 6A-48 for broadcast application procedures. 

 
NATIVE SEED MIXES 

 
 Ecoregion Upland Areas Sandy, Droughty Areas Wet or Saline Areas  
  Mix #1 %WT Mix #2 %WT Mix #3 %WT  
 Mixed Grassland 

Ecoregion 

Moist Mixed 
Grassland Ecoregion 

Lake Manitoba Plain 
Ecoregion 

northern wheatgrass 35 
western wheatgrass 20 
june grass 15 
plains rough fescue 15 
blue grama  10 
western porcupine grass 5 

northern wheatgrass 30 
blue grama 20 
prairie sand-reed 20 
june grass 15 
western wheatgrass 10 
needle-and-thread grass 5 
 

western wheatgrass 30 
alkali grass 15 
tufted hair grass 15 
june grass 15 
slough grass 10 
spangletop  10 
green needle grass 5 

 

  Mix #4 %WT Mix #5 %WT Mix #6 %WT  
 Aspen Parkland 

Ecoregion 

SW Manitoba Upland 
Ecoregion 

northern wheatgrass 25 
slender wheatgrass 20 
june grass 20 
little bluestem 15 
plains rough fescue 10 
rough hair grass 10 

northern wheatgrass 30 
little bluestem 20 
june grass 15 
slender wheatgrass 15 
plains rough fescue 10 
prairie sand-reed 10 

western wheatgrass 30 
Nuttall's alkali grass 20 
big bluestem 20 
slender wheatgrass 15 
june grass 15 
 

 

 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

SEED MIXES 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-46a 

 
 



 

 
NON-NATIVE SEED MIXES 

 Ecoregion Upland Areas Sandy, Droughty Areas Wet or Saline Areas  
  Mix #7 %WT Mix #8 %WT Mix #9 %WT  
 Mixed Grassland 

Ecoregion 

Moist Mixed 
Grassland Ecoregion 

Lake Manitoba Plain 
Ecoregion 

northern wheatgrass 30 
intermediate wheatgrass 20 
western wheatgrass 20 
slender wheatgrass 20 
alfalfa or cicer milk-vetch 10 

pubescent wheatgrass 25 
northern wheatgrass 25 
sheep fescue 25 
slender wheatgrass 15 
alfalfa or cicer milk-vetch 10 

western wheatgrass 35 
slender wheatgrass 25 
creeping foxtail 20 
tall wheatgrass 10 
bird's-foot trefoil 10 
 

 

  Mix #10 %WT Mix #11 %WT Mix #12 %WT  
 Aspen Parkland 

Ecoregion 

Central Parkland 
Natural Subregion 

Northern Fescue 
Natural Subregion 

SW Manitoba Upland 
Ecoregion 

meadow brome 40 
intermediate wheatgrass 25 
creeping red fescue 15 
orchard grass 10 
alfalfa or cicer milk-vetch 10 

northern wheatgrass 25 
Russian wild rye 20 
sheep fescue 20 
meadow brome 15 
orchard grass  10 
alfalfa or cicer milk-vetch 10 

creeping foxtail 20 
western wheatgrass 20 
tall wheatgrass 20 
slender wheatgrass 20 
slough grass 10 
bird's-foot trefoil 10 

 

 
NATIVE SEED MIXES IN ALBERTA 

 
Ecoregion Upland Areas Sandy, Droughty Areas Wet or Saline Areas 

 Mix #13 %WT Mix #14 %WT Mix #15 %WT 
Central Parkland 
Natural Subregion  

Northern Fescue 
Natural Subregion 

northern wheatgrass  40 
slender/awned wheatgrass  20 
plains rough fescue 15 
june grass 15 
western porcupine grass 10 

northern wheatgrass 40 
green needle grass 20 
prairie sand reed 15 
june grass 15 
plains rough fescue 10 

western wheatgrass 50 
slough grass 15 
slender/awned wheatgrass  15 
Nutall’s alkali grass 10 
june grass  10 

 
NATIVE SEED MIXES IN PFRA LANDS 

 
 

 Mix #16 %WT  Mix #17 %WT 
Central Parkland 
Natural Subregion  

Northern Fescue 
Natural Subregion 

northern wheatgrass 30 
june grass 25 
western wheatgrass 20 
blue grama 10 
prairie sand-reed 10 
needle-and-thread grass 5 

Elbow PFRA Lands western wheatgrass 30 
northern wheatgrass 20 
blue grama 15 
june grass 15 
sand dropseed 10 
needle-and-thread grass 5 
western porcupine grass 5 

 
 
 

 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

SEED MIXES 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-46b 

 



 
CRITERIA FOR IMPLEMENTATION 
 
1. Drill seeding will be used on all segments to be seeded with the exception of the following areas: 
 

• slopes which are too steep to safely operate the tractor and seed drill; 
 

• areas too wet to access with a tractor and seed drill without causing rutting and poor seed placement; 
 

• stony areas which could cause damage to the equipment or impede the ability of the drill to properly place the seed; and 
 

• any areas which cannot be feasibly reached with the seed drill. 
 
 
Notes: 
 
1. All seed drills will be calibrated for each seed mix using the manufacturer's recommended procedures; alternate calibration 

procedures may be used if approved by the Environmental Inspector(s). 
 
2. The seeding contractor will develop and have approved by the Environmental Inspector(s), appropriate seeding procedures 

to ensure even distribution of all species in each seed mix.  This may involve, but not be limited to: 
 

• using seed box agitators to prevent stratification of large and small seeds; 
 

• seeding large and small seed species from separate seed boxes, or in separate passes with the seeder; or 
 

• using an inert filler agent with the seed mix. 
 
3. Seeding depth will be 1-2 cm in fine textured soils and 1-3 cm in sandy soils. 
 
4. Only the stripped or cultivated width of the construction right-of-way will be seeded with minimal overlap onto undisturbed 

areas. Swing-out passes will be made to seed scalped areas adjacent to the stripped portion as needed. 
 
5. Complete coverage of the stripped area will be ensured by using a sufficient number of passes. Damage to the native sod 

adjacent to the disturbed portion of the right-of-way will be avoided. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

DRILL SEEDING 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-47 

 



 
Broadcast seeding will be used on noncultivated lands where drill seeding cannot be conducted. 
 
 
Notes: 
 
1. All broadcast seeders will be calibrated on site using the manufacturer's recommended procedures; alternate calibration 

procedures may be used if approved by the Environmental Inspector(s). 
 
2. The seeding contractor will develop and have approved by the Environmental Inspector(s), appropriate seeding procedures 

to ensure even distribution of all species in each seed mix. This may involve, but not be limited to: 
 

• using seed box agitators to prevent stratification of large and small seeds; 
 

• seeding large and small seed species from separate seed boxes, or in separate passes with the seeder; or 
 

• using an inert filler agent with the seed mix. 
 
3. Only the stripped or cultivated width of the construction right-of-way will be seeded unless otherwise directed by the 

Environmental Inspector(s). 
 
4. Broadcast seeding will be delayed during high wind conditions, as directed by the Environmental Inspector(s). 
 
5. Where site and safety conditions allow, seed will be harrowed into a depth of 1-3 cm, using standard agricultural harrows or 

other approved equipment.  
 
6. Harrowing will be conducted immediately following broadcasting. Steep slopes that cannot be safely harrowed will be hand 

raked, if feasible, to incorporate seed if feasible. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

BROADCAST SEEDING 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-48 

 



 
CRITERIA FOR IMPLEMENTATION 
 
Cover crop seeding may be used, if warranted, for faster vegetative cover on erosion-prone areas such as moderate to steep 
slopes, exposed windy areas and areas with coarse textured soils. 
 
A cover crop is a fast-growing annual or biennial species that is seeded to control erosion and limit weed growth while 
predisturbance vegetation is restored. 
 
Potential cover crop species include annual ryegrass, winter wheat, fall rye, slender/awned wheat grass, Canada wild rye, hairy wild 
rye and triticale. 
 
Monitoring during subsequent years will be conducted to ensure the cover crop does not become permanently established and 
provide excessive competition to the desired species. 
 
If the cover crop is found to be persistent, it will be mowed prior to heading and seed set. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

COVER CROP 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-49 

 



 
The right-of-way segments in the Sounding Dunes within the Sounding-Sunken Environmentally Significant Area (KP 217.5 to 
KP 230.8), Elbow PFRA Community Pasture (KP 560.4 to KP 566.4), Oak Lake Sand Hills (KP 1008.0 to KP 1012.0), Souris Sand 
Hills (KP 1021.0 to KP 1025.3), and other areas with Scarth or Dune Sand soil series (see Environmental Alignment Sheets) are 
especially difficult to reclaim because of the extremely sandy nature of the soils. Extra measures to minimize soils and vegetation 
disturbance, and prevent soil erosion are warranted. The following construction and reclamation measures will be implemented 
supplementary to standard measures. 
 
Notes: 
 
CONSTRUCTION 
 
1. Implement the Traffic Control Plan (Appendix 6C) to minimize the impact of rubber tired vehicles. To the extent feasible, 

inspection and supervisory personnel should use quad access. 
2. Restrict construction traffic to the right-of-way and approved access trails and shoo-flies. 
3. Clear and salvage merchantable timber as directed on the Line List or by the Environmental Inspector. 
4. Delay clearing until just prior to topsoil stripping.  
5. Avoid grubbing of tree roots to the extent feasible; use a stump grinder to prepare the right-of-way for construction traffic. 
6. Shovel or compressed air clean all topsoil handling equipment prior to entering the Sounding Dunes, Elbow PFRA 

Community Pasture, Oak Lake Sand Hills and Souris Sand Hills. 
7. Minimize the width of topsoil stripping to the extent feasible by stripping one blade width centered over the trench; widen the 

stripping area if trench sloughing occurs and the risk of topsoil/subsoil mixing exists. 
8. Minimize travel on the right-of-way by stringing trucks; confine truck travel to the stripped area to the extent feasible and 

assign a tow cat to assist trucks through excessively loose sand. 
9. Retain all non-salvageable timber along the edge of the right-of-way for use as erosion control. 
10. Tackify topsoil windrows if the potential exists for wind erosion during construction (Detail 6A-18). 
 
RECLAMATION 
 
1. Reclamation work will be initiated within two weeks following pipe installation and backfill, if soil and weather conditions 

permit. 
2. The disturbed portion of the slopes will be recontoured to the preconstruction profile. 
3. After replacing salvaged topsoil, install erosion control matting (Detail 6A-42) on steep cut banks and slopes, as directed by 

the Environmental Inspector. 
4. Hydro-seeding may be conducted in place of matting, as directed by the Environmental Inspector. 
5. Use staked logs for erosion control on slopes as directed by the Environmental Inspector (Detail 6A-43) and approved by the 

landowner/land authority. Straw-crimp (Detail 6A-45) and seed with a cover crop (Detail 6A-49), where directed by the 
Environmental Inspector. Seed with seed mixes as identified on the Environmental Alignment Sheets (Detail 6A-46). 

6. Spread small diameter slash, woody debris and wood chips (Detail 6A-5) where directed by the Environmental Inspector 
(Detail 6A-41).  

7. Consider fencing the right-of-way to avoid overgrazing during seed establishment on the right-of-way. 
 
CONSTRUCTION OF SECOND PIPELINE WITHIN 6 MONTHS 
 
Should an adjacent pipeline construction project be planned within 6 months of the construction of this project, the following 
measures shall be implemented. 

 
1. Do not replace the topsoil. Leave the topsoil in windrows with gaps to allow for movement of wildlife, farm equipment and 

livestock. 
2. Seed the topsoil windrow with a cover crop (Detail 6A-49) and tackify (Detail 6A-18). 
3. Fence the topsoil windrows to avoid disturbance by livestock and wildlife. 
4. Straw crimp (Detail 6A-45) the subsoil to minimize the potential for wind erosion. 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

DUNE SAND SOIL AND OTHER SANDY AREAS 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-50 

 



Wetland Function 

General mitigative measures to be implemented to minimize reduction or loss of wetland functions (hydrologic, water quality and habitat) 
include the following. 
• A construction schedule that avoids high water levels (i.e., spring and wet weather) is preferred. Construction activities that are limited 

to the late summer, fall and winter will avoid temporary disturbance to ephemeral potholes, thereby minimizing the number of wetland 
issues. If construction is scheduled for the spring/early summer period, TERA recommends preclearing / premowing (prior to April 1) of 
trees, shrubs and tall grasses to discourage nesting on the proposed right-of-way.  

• No clearing activities are to occur within the migratory bird nesting period between April 1 and July 31. Construction activities may 
proceed within the nesting period where the area has been precleared or premowed prior to April 1 or if no nests were observed during 
nest surveys conducted prior to construction. 

• Narrow down the proposed area of disturbance and protect the wetland by using fencing, clearly mark the wetland boundaries using 
flagging and limit traffic in the vicinity of the flagged area [EGC 02-3]. 

• Ensure activities planned adhere to the following spill prevention measures: prohibit fuel storage, refuelling or servicing of equipment 
within 100 m of wetlands except where secondary containment is provided; and ensure equipment used for construction within the 
wetland is well maintained and free of fluid leaks. In the event of a spill, immediately implement measures to stop, control the migration 
of, and clean up the spilled substance as outlined in the Spill Contingency Plan in Appendix 6B (see also Accidents and Malfunctions 
element 18.1 of Table 6.2) [EGC 02-2]. 

• Schedule maintenance activities during frozen conditions to the extent feasible.  
 
Mitigative measures to be implemented prior to and during construction to minimize alteration of wetland functions (hydrologic, water 
quality and habitat) include the following. 
• Minimize the removal of vegetation and the disturbance of soil adjacent to wetlands [EGC 02-4, EGC 02-11]. 
• Maintain low vegetation or vegetative ground mat within a 16 m buffer adjacent to wetlands to the extent practical by walking, storing 

and constructing over the undisturbed ground [EGC 01-6, EGC 02-4]. 
• Salvage live trees or shrubs from banks of wetlands if requested by landowners. Store salvaged trees and shrubs on the side of the 

right-of-way in a manner such that they do not dry out before replanting during restoration (Detail 6A-2) [EGC 02-4]. 
• Minimize the width of grubbing through wet areas during construction to facilitate the restoration of shrub communities [EGC 02-4, 

EGC 02-11]. 
• Cut / mow / walk down shrubs and small diameter trees at ground level and minimize grubbing in temporary workspace. 
• Restrict grading as much as practical. Conduct grading adjacent to wetlands away from the wetland to the extent practical to reduce 

the risk of sediment and other material entering the wetland [EGC 02-7, EGC 02-11]. Keep wetland soils separate from upland soils 
[EGC 02-5]. 

• Use wide-track equipment or conventional equipment operated from swamp mats when working on saturated soils during nonfrozen 
ground conditions to avoid compaction. 

• Install a shoo-fly around wetlands or construct a subsoil ramp if approved by appropriate regulatory authorities. Restrict access 
through wetlands to the shoo-fly or ramp to the extent practical. 

• Protect and maintain shallow shoreline areas that contain emergent vegetation (e.g., graminoids).  
• Plan trenching, installation and backfilling to minimize periods of open trench. Slope trench walls to maintain stability. 
• Where dewatering of the trench with pumps is deemed necessary, ensure all pumped trench water is discharged without causing 

erosion and is filtered through established vegetation and stable soils. Pumped trench water must be clear of suspended solids before 
entering natural waterbodies. 

• Conduct grading adjacent to wetlands away from the wetland to the extent feasible to reduce the risk of sediment and other material 
entering the wetland. 

• Store excavated material in a manner that does not interfere with natural drainage patterns [EGC 02-7]. 
• Salvage surface material in unsaturated wetlands, giving extra attention to maintaining root stocks for replacement. Salvage surface 

material to a maximum depth of 40 cm, or to the depth of colour change where there is less than 40 cm of surface material, using the 
Environmental Alignment Sheets as a guide. 

• Leave an undisturbed organic mat as a buffer zone adjacent to large wetlands to limit the potential for sediment to enter wetlands, if 
practical [EGC 01-6, EGC 02-4]. 

• Install berms, cross ditches and/or silt fences between wetlands and disturbed areas to prevent sedimentation of wetlands 
(Details 6A-23 and 6A-24). Ensure silt fences have been installed properly, are solid and filter fabric is tight. 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

WETLAND FUNCTION 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-51a 

 



• Install culverts, if warranted, to prevent grading or spoil from blocking natural drainage and causing ponding that may act as 
reproductive sinks [EGC 02-2]. Follow measures listed under Water Quality and Quantity element 3.1 of Table 6.2. Avoid changing 
natural hydrological cycles and water levels; maintain streamflow and avoid diverting creeks and streams away from wetland areas. 

• Install trench breakers, where warranted, at the edge of perched wetlands to prevent the pipe trench from acting as a drain 
(Detail 6A-20). 

• Construct trench breakers and/or seal the trench bottom as necessary to maintain the original wetland hydrology, where the pipeline trench 
may drain a wetland. 

• Do not dewater any permanent wetland. 
• Install swamp mats or geotextiles to allow heavy vehicles/equipment to cross wetlands during nonfrozen ground conditions. Remove 

swamp mats or geotextiles immediately after construction activity at that location has been completed. 
• Install temporary erosion control structures (e.g., silt fences and/or straw bales) within 24 hours of backfilling the wetland crossing 

(Detail 6A-24) [EGC 02-7, EGC 02-11, EGC 02-14]. Ensure silt fences have been installed properly, are solid and filter fabric is tight. 
• Inspect and maintain sediment barriers regularly (i.e., weekly or within 24 hours of substantial rainfall). Remove sediment barriers after 

the disturbed area is revegetated and the area is stable [EGC 02-14]. 
 
Site-specific mitigative measures to be implemented as indicated on the Environmental Alignment Sheets are as follows. 
• Maintain water levels in all wetlands encountered within the game bird refuge and Oak Lake/Plum Lakes Important Bird Area 

(approximately KP 985 to KP 1004). Do not drain wetlands in this area unless otherwise requested / approved by provincial and 
federal authorities. Restore disturbed areas in wetlands to preconstruction profile during reclamation. Remove any excess backfill to 
an upland location approved by the appropriate regulatory authorities [EGC 03-2, EGC 03-3]. 

• Develop site-specific mitigative measures in consultation with the Manitoba Habitat Heritage Corporation and Canadian Wildlife 
Service to minimize impacts to Ducks Unlimited projects, Conservation Agreements (CA) and North American Waterfowl Management 
Plan (NAWMP) priority areas along the route.  

• For locations with high water table: 
• Use buoyancy controls for the pipe as required. 
• Where dewatering of the trench with pumps is deemed necessary, ensure all pumped trench water is discharged without causing 

erosion and is filtered through established vegetation and stable soils. Slope trench walls to maintain stability as necessary 
[EGC 02-17]. 

• Remove all mats and ramps used to enable work and travel through wet areas and all bar ditch ramps in order that they do not 
impede the restoration of natural flow patterns. 

• Maintain adequate culverts if any ramps are left in place with approval from the landowner. 
 
Restoration measures to be implemented to minimize reduction or loss of wetland functions (hydrologic, water quality and habitat) include 
the following. 
• Restore preconstruction profile in wetlands during reclamation. Remove any excess backfill to an upland location approved by the 

appropriate regulatory authorities [EGC 03-2, EGC 03-3]. Ensure drainage channels are restored. 
• Remove all mats and ramps used to enable work and travel through wet areas. Also remove all bar ditch ramps from areas with 

mineral soils and where requested by the appropriate authority in order that they do not impede the restoration of natural flow patterns. 
• Seed wetland with an appropriate wetland mix as indicated on the Environmental Alignment Sheets (Detail 6A-46).  
• Where shrubs are present prior to construction, use live plant staking (e.g., willows) along the wetland to stabilize disturbances and 

reduce sedimentation risk to wetland (Detail 6A-38) [EGC 03-7]. 
• Maintain silt fences in place at wetland boundaries until revegetation of upland right-of-way is stable. 
• Maintain adequate culverts if any ramps are left in place with approval from the appropriate authority. 
 
Post-construction monitoring and maintenance measures to be implemented to confirm that reduction or loss of wetland functions 
(hydrologic, water quality and habitat) has not occurred and to prevent the loss of wetland function during the operations phase include the 
following. 
• Monitor wetland function during the post-construction monitoring program.  
• Qualitative assessment of wetland vegetation growth; wetland vegetation shall be considered successful if the cover of vegetation 

species appears equivalent to the type, density and distribution of the vegetation in wetland adjacent areas that were not disturbed 
during construction. 

• Schedule maintenance activities during frozen conditions to the extent feasible. 
• Follow above measures for work in wetlands during operations. 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

WETLAND FUNCTION 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6A-51b 

 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

APPENDIX 6B 
 

CONTINGENCY PLANS 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-i 
 
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 

1.0 FLOOD AND EXCESSIVE FLOW CONTINGENCY PLAN........................................................6B-1 
2.0 FIRE CONTINGENCY PLAN......................................................................................................6B-3 
3.0 WET / THAWED SOILS CONTINGENCY PLAN........................................................................6B-4 
4.0 SOIL HANDLING CONTINGENCY PLAN ..................................................................................6B-8 
5.0 CRITERIA FOR PROGRESSIVELY INCREASED TOPSOIL STRIPPING WIDTHS ................6B-9 
6.0 SOIL EROSION CONTINGENCY PLAN ................................................................................. 6B-10 
7.0 SOIL/SOD PULVERIZATION CONTINGENCY PLAN ............................................................ 6B-12 
8.0 SILTATION OF WATERCOURSES CONTINGENCY PLAN .................................................. 6B-13 
9.0 SPILL CONTINGENCY PLAN ................................................................................................. 6B-14 

9.1 Introduction ................................................................................................................. 6B-14 
9.2 General Measures....................................................................................................... 6B-15 
9.3 Initial Response........................................................................................................... 6B-15 
9.4 General Spill Containment Procedures....................................................................... 6B-15 

9.4.1 Transportation by Truck ................................................................................. 6B-16 
9.4.2 Spills Adjacent to or into a Watercourse or Wetland ..................................... 6B-16 
9.4.3 Spot Spills ...................................................................................................... 6B-16 

10.0 DIRECTIONAL DRILLING PROCEDURES AND INSTREAM DRILLING MUD RELEASE 
CONTINGENCY PLAN ............................................................................................................ 6B-19 
10.1 General Measures....................................................................................................... 6B-19 
10.2 Emergency Response Equipment .............................................................................. 6B-19 
10.3 Monitoring ................................................................................................................... 6B-20 
10.4 Emergency Response................................................................................................. 6B-21 
10.5 Plans for Potential Continuance of Drilling ................................................................. 6B-22 

11.0 FISH AND BIVALVE SPECIES OF CONCERN DISCOVERY CONTINGENCY PLAN.......... 6B-24 
12.0 PLANT SPECIES OF CONCERN DISCOVERY CONTINGENCY PLAN ............................... 6B-26 
13.0 WILDLIFE SPECIES OF CONCERN DISCOVERY CONTINGENCY PLAN.......................... 6B-28 
14.0 WILDLIFE ENCOUNTER CONTINGENCY PLAN .................................................................. 6B-30 
15.0 HERITAGE RESOURCE DISCOVERY CONTINGENCY PLAN............................................. 6B-31 
 

LIST OF DRAWINGS 
Detail 6B-1 Vascular Plant Species of Concern and Sensitive Plant Community Mitigation ........ 6B-27 
 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-1 
 
 

CONTINGENCY PLANS 
Enbridge has a comprehensive emergency response program which includes procedures, inventory and 
maintenance of response equipment, and program development. The plan will be activated during 
construction in the event of an incident involving the Alberta Clipper Project. For construction-related 
spills, Section 9.0 below provides procedures to contain and clean-up the spill. Additional contingency 
measures for damage to soils and siltation of watercourses, as well as strategies that may be required in 
the event of flood or excessive flows, fire, release of instream drilling mud, wildlife encounters or 
discovery of fish and bivalve species of concern, plant species of concern, wildlife species of concern and 
heritage resources, are provided in the following subsections. 

1.0 FLOOD AND EXCESSIVE FLOW CONTINGENCY PLAN 
Notify Enbridge's Environmental Inspector or Chief Inspector that contingency measures have been 
initiated as a result of flooding or excessive streamflow along the pipeline route, so that a record of the 
location, timing and reason for implementation of the contingency plan is maintained. Appropriate 
authorities such as AENV, SENV, Manitoba Conservation, DFO and the NEB will be notified, as soon as 
practical, by the Environmental Inspector or Chief Inspector, that contingency measures have been 
implemented (see Tables 6D-1 to 6D-3 in Appendix 6D of this ESA). See also Siltation of Watercourses 
Contingency Plan (Section 8.0 of Appendix 6B of this ESA). 

The weather conditions will be monitored by the Environmental Inspector on a daily basis. If a major 
storm is predicted or occurs, qualified personnel will inspect all watercourse crossings where construction 
is in progress or has been completed, to determine whether any corrective actions need to be 
implemented. 

If the potential for siltation of a watercourse due to contractor activity is predicted, the contingency plans 
for Soil Erosion and for Siltation of Watercourses (Sections 6.0 and 8.0 of Appendix 6B of this ESA) will 
be implemented. 

At watercourses where an isolated crossing method is preferred, the proposed isolation crossing 
techniques may not be feasible during periods of excessive flow or unusually wet seasons. Excessive 
flows are flows that are greater than the seasonally expected normal range based on existing and 
predicted flow data. 

The following contingency measures will be implemented progressively or individually, as warranted, if 
excessive flow or flood conditions are anticipated prior to commencing watercourse crossing construction. 

1. Assess the capability to handle the forecasted flow rate with the proposed crossing method. If use of 
the proposed crossing method is determined by Enbridge to be still feasible, the crossing will 
proceed. 

2. Defer water crossing construction to a later time when flows have subsided, if determined by 
Enbridge that the proposed crossing method is not feasible. 

3. Alternatively, where the forecasted flow rates and window limitations combine to preclude the 
proposed crossing method, request the appropriate authority (e.g., DFO, AENV, SENV, Manitoba 
Conservation) for permission to use the approved alternative crossing method. 

The following contingency measures will be implemented progressively or individually, as warranted, if 
excessive flow or flood conditions should occur during watercourse crossing construction. 

1. Withdraw all equipment or tanks containing fuel, oil or other hazardous materials from potential flood 
areas. 

2. Relocate all topsoil piles at the direction of the Environmental Inspector. 

3. Relocate spoil piles, to the extent feasible, to a position above the anticipated high water level. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-2 
 
 

4. Remove all stationary and mobile equipment deployed at the crossing site to a safe area above the 
anticipated high water level. 

5. Remove any instream flume or dam equipment that may impede streamflow, as safe work conditions 
allow. 

6. Evaluate vehicle crossing structure to determine whether adequate free-board is present on bridges 
and adequate capacity is available in culverts. Take corrective measures as appropriate to avoid 
flooding of adjacent lands. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-3 
 
 

2.0 FIRE CONTINGENCY PLAN 
Appropriate provincial and municipal authorities as well as other applicable provincial government 
agencies and the NEB will be notified as soon as practical by the Chief Inspector or Environmental 
Inspector, that contingency measures have been implemented (see Tables 6D-1 to 6D-3 in Appendix 6D 
of this ESA). 

Fire Suppression Measures 
The following standard measures will be adhered to during construction of the Alberta Clipper Project, 
including pipeline, pump additions and tank components. 

1. All activity project coordinators and Contractors’ vehicles will carry fire-fighting equipment in 
accordance with provincial regulations. In addition, all motorized equipment must carry a fully charged 
fire extinguisher. 

2. Prior to commencement of construction, the Contractor will designate one of his staff as Fire Boss. 
The Fire Boss will be familiar with fire-fighting techniques and equipment within the limits of available 
resources. 

In the Event of a Wild Fire 
The following mitigative measures will be implemented in the event of a wild fire. 

1. Commence fire suppression measures immediately upon detection of fire provided that fire conditions 
allow personnel to safely proceed. 

2. Report location of fire, as well as size of fire and wind direction, to the Fire Boss. 

3. The Fire Boss will report wild fires and relevant information to Enbridge's Environment, Health and 
Safety staff and Chief Inspector. Applicable provincial authorities will be notified. 

4. The Fire Boss will deploy fire-fighting equipment and crew to clear or plow fire breaks or extinguish 
the fire directly if possible. The Fire boss will notify the local fire department or 
Alberta/Saskatchewan/Manitoba Forest Fire Reporting Centre (1-800-663-5555 / 1-800-667-9660 / 
1-800-782-0076) if contractor resources are inadequate. All equipment and personnel adequately fit 
and trained shall be made available to control the fire. 

5. The Fire Boss will inspect the fire site as soon as possible and take charge of directing suppression 
measures. 

6. Movable material, particularly explosive or flammable materials, vehicles etc., will be promptly moved 
to a safe location whenever there is a possibility of being endangered by fire.  

7. The Fire Boss will ensure that all burning embers are extinguished and will monitor burn area for 
smouldering material.  



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-4 
 
 

3.0 WET / THAWED SOILS CONTINGENCY PLAN 
Enbridge will assign Environmental Inspectors with sufficient training and soils-related experience to be 
able to identify soils that are too wet for a particular activity and when the soils are sufficiently dry to allow 
the activity to resume. The decision to continue or suspend particular pipeline construction activities on 
lands with excessively wet/thawed soils will be made by the Chief Inspector in consultation with the 
Environmental Inspector. The Environmental Inspector or Chief Inspector will employ the criteria 
presented in Tables 6B-1 and 6B-2 of this ESA, as a guide to activities where contingency measures are 
warranted. A record of the location, timing and reason for implementation of the Wet / Thawed Soils 
Contingency Plan will be maintained by the Environmental Inspector. In the event that activities are 
suspended during pipeline or facility construction, the landowner and the NEB will be notified as soon as 
practical by the Environmental Inspector or the Chief Inspector. 

Soils are considered to be excessively wet when the planned activity could cause damage to soils either 
due to rutting by traffic through the topsoil layer into the subsoil; soil structure damage during soil 
handling; or compaction and associated pulverization of topsoil structure damage due to heavy traffic.  

Contingency measures will be implemented, if warranted, once one of the following indicators occurs: 

• rutting of topsoil or root zone material to the extent that admixing may occur; 

• excessive wheelslip; 

• excessive build-up of mud on tires and cleats; 

• formation of puddles; or 

• tracking of mud as vehicles leave the right-of-way. 

In order to minimize terrain disturbance and soil structure damage through rutting or compaction due to 
wet soil conditions, construction alternatives will be employed, as necessary, in the event of thawed soils 
during frozen conditions or an excessively wet surface during nonfrozen conditions. The contingency 
measures listed below will be implemented individually or in combination, as necessary, based on site-
specific conditions.  

Wet Soil Contingency Measures 

1. Restrict construction traffic, where feasible, to equipment with low-ground pressure tires or wide pad 
tracks. 

2. Work only in nonproblem areas, such as well-drained soil or well-sodded lands, until conditions 
improve. 

3. Install geotextiles, swamp mats or corduroy constructed from nonsalvageable timber in problem 
areas. 

4. Consider stripping an additional width of topsoil in problem areas. 
5. Suspend construction until soils dry out.  

Thawed Soil Contingency Measures 

1. Restrict construction traffic, where feasible, to equipment with low-ground pressure tires or wide pad 
tracks. 

2. Work only in nonproblem areas, such as frozen or well-drained soils, until conditions improve. 
3. Postpone construction until evening or early morning when the ground is frozen. 
4. Install geotextiles, swamp mats or corduroy constructed from nonsalvageable timber in problem 

areas. 
5. Employ frost inducement measures such as snow packing or plowing to increase the load-bearing 

capacity of thawed ground. 
6. Suspend construction until soils dry out or freeze. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-5 
 
 

If the indicators of excessively wet/thawed soil conditions previously noted above are not evident, soils 
will be considered dry enough to resume activity.  

TABLE 6B-1 
 

CRITERIA FOR THE SUSPENSION OF ACTIVITIES DUE TO EXCESSIVELY WET SOIL CONDITIONS 

Land Use Topsoil Salvage Status Construction Activity 
Suspend Activity for 

Environmental Issue? 
No salvage conducted Soils handling (topsoil 

stripping/ replacement) 
Yes 

No salvage conducted Pipe stringing Yes 
Trench and spoil area 
stripped 

Pipe stringing No, if stringing truck traffic is 
restricted to the stripped area 

Trench and spoil, and work 
area stripped 

Pipe stringing No 

No salvage conducted Welding Yes 
Trench and spoil area 
stripped 

Welding Yes 

Trench and spoil, and work 
area stripped 

Welding No 

Trench and spoil area 
stripped 

Trenching No 

Trench and spoil area 
stripped 

Lowering-in Yes 

Trench and spoil, and work 
area stripped 

Lowering-in No 

Trench and spoil area 
stripped 

Backfilling No if backfilling with back hoes 
or clean up bucket 
Yes if dozers are used. 

Trench and spoil, and work 
area stripped 

Backfilling No 

Trench and spoil area 
stripped 

Testing Yes (testing would not be 
initiated but would continue if 
filling with test water has begun) 

Trench and spoil, and work 
area stripped 

Testing No 

Topsoil replaced Testing Yes (testing would not be 
initiated but would continue if 
filling with test water has begun) 

Cultivated and Poorly-
sodded Hay, Pasture, 
Native Prairie and 
Bush-Pasture 

Topsoil replaced Clean-up Yes - heavy traffic not permitted; 
No - quad traffic likely 
acceptable 

No salvage conducted Soils handling (topsoil 
stripping/ replacement) 

Yes 

No salvage conducted Pipe stringing Yes 
Blade width stripping 
conducted 

Pipe stringing No, if stringing truck traffic is 
restricted to the stripped area 

Blade width and work area 
stripped 

Pipe stringing No 

No salvage conducted Welding No - activity to be closely 
monitored and suspended if 
warranted 

Blade width stripping 
conducted 

Welding No - activity to be closely 
monitored and suspended if 
warranted 

Well-sodded Lands; 
Hay, Pasture, Native 
Prairie and Bush-
Pasture 

Blade width and work area 
stripped 

Welding No 

 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-6 
 
 

TABLE 6B-1  Cont'd 

Land Use Topsoil Salvage Status Construction Activity 
Suspend Activity for 

Environmental Issue? 
Blade width stripping 
conducted 

Trenching No 

Blade width stripping 
conducted 

Lowering-in No - activity to be closely 
monitored and suspended if 
warranted 

Blade width and work area 
stripped 

Lowering-in No 

Blade width stripping 
conducted 

Backfilling Yes 

Blade width and work area 
stripped 

Backfilling Yes 

Blade width stripping 
conducted 

Testing No 

Blade width and work area 
stripped 

Testing No 

Topsoil replaced Testing Yes (testing would not be 
initiated but would continue if 
filling with test water has begun) 

Well-sodded Lands; 
Hay, Pasture, Native 
Prairie and Bush-
Pasture (cont’d) 

Topsoil replaced Clean-up Yes - heavy traffic not permitted; 
No - quad traffic likely 
acceptable 

 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-7 
 
 

TABLE 6B-2 
 

CRITERIA FOR THE SUSPENSION OF ACTIVITIES DUE TO THAWED SOIL CONDITIONS 

Land Use Topsoil Salvage Status Construction Activity 
Suspend Activity for 

Environmental Issue? 
No salvage conducted Soils handling (topsoil 

stripping/ replacement) 
Yes 

No salvage conducted Pipe stringing Yes 
Blade width stripped Pipe stringing No - if stringing truck traffic is 

restricted to the stripped area 
No salvage conducted Welding Yes 
Blade width stripped Welding Yes 
Blade width stripped Trenching No 
Blade width stripped Lowering-in Yes 
Blade width stripped Backfilling Yes 
Blade width stripped Testing Yes - testing would not be 

initiated but would continue if 
filling with test water has begun 

Topsoil replaced Testing Yes - testing would not be 
initiated but would continue if 
filling with test water has begun 

Cultivated and Poorly-
sodded Hay, Pasture, 
Native Prairie and 
Bush-Pasture 

Topsoil replaced Clean-up Yes - heavy traffic not permitted; 
No - quad traffic likely 
acceptable 

No salvage conducted Soils handling (topsoil 
stripping/ replacement) 

Yes 

No salvage conducted Pipe stringing Yes 
Blade width stripping 
conducted 

Pipe stringing No - if stringing truck traffic is 
restricted to the stripped area 

No salvage conducted Welding No - activity to be closely 
monitored and suspended if 
warranted 

Blade width stripping 
conducted 

Welding No - activity to be closely 
monitored and suspended if 
warranted 

Blade width stripping 
conducted 

Trenching No 

Blade width stripping 
conducted 

Lowering-in No - activity to be closely 
monitored and suspended if 
warranted 

Blade width stripping 
conducted 

Backfilling Yes 

Blade width stripping 
conducted 

Testing No 

Topsoil replaced Testing Yes - testing would not be 
initiated but would continue if 
filling with test water has begun 

Well-sodded Lands; 
Hay, Pasture, Native 
Prairie and Bush 
Pasture 

Topsoil replaced Clean-up Yes - heavy traffic not permitted; 
No - quad traffic likely 
acceptable 

 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-8 
 
 

4.0 SOIL HANDLING CONTINGENCY PLAN 
Where warranted, the NEB will be notified as soon as practical that contingency measures have been 
implemented during the construction of the pipeline component of the Alberta Clipper Project. 

While soils handling criteria presented in Section 5.0 of Appendix 6B of this ESA addresses the key soils 
handling questions that could occur during pipeline construction, the following minor problems may arise 
during construction which may result in loss of soil capability if not addressed. Mitigative measures are 
provided to lessen the potential impacts associated with construction. 

 

Condition/Concern Mitigative Options 

Uneven boundary between 
topsoil and subsoil 

1. Utilize equipment capable of fine depth adjustments when salvaging 
topsoil. 

Uneven surface on native 
prairie, hay or pasture 

2. Consider stripping spoil pile area on native prairie, hay and pasture. 

3. Use equipment with fine depth control to backfill spoil in contact with 
sod layer. 

4. Consider use of prairie protector on clean-up bucket or grader blade. 

5. Minimize scalping of sod layer. 
  
 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-9 
 
 

5.0 CRITERIA FOR PROGRESSIVELY INCREASED TOPSOIL STRIPPING 
WIDTHS 

The topsoil salvage procedures shown on the Environmental Alignment Sheets and described in 
Table 6.2 of the ESA provide the minimum topsoil salvage width requirements based on land use and 
vegetation criteria. During pipeline construction, it is anticipated that several situations will arise where it 
will be necessary to increase the minimum stripping width requirements. In many instances, the stripping 
width will be increased to accommodate grading requirements for construction safety and engineering 
design reasons. In other cases, environmental effect issues are identified which necessitate increasing 
the topsoil salvage width as a mitigative measure. 

The criteria for selection of alternate soil handling methods, provided in Figure 6A-1 of Appendix 6A of 
this ESA, will be implemented to increase the stripping width where necessary, based on site-specific 
conditions at the time of construction of the pipeline. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-10 
 
 

6.0 SOIL EROSION CONTINGENCY PLAN 
Enbridge's Environmental Inspector will recommend to the Chief Inspector that contingency measures be 
initiated during construction of the pipeline component of the Alberta Clipper Project. A record of the 
location, timing and reason for implementation of the contingency plan will be maintained by the 
Environmental Inspector. In the event that soils are impacted to an extent that reclamation may be 
impeded, the Environmental Inspector or Chief Inspector will notify the appropriate authority (i.e., AENV, 
SENV, Manitoba Conservation, PFRA pasture manager or landowner) and the NEB as soon as practical 
(see Tables 6D-1 to 6D-3 in Appendix 6D of this ESA). 

Contractor equipment and personnel will be made available to control the erosion. During the construction 
phase of the pipeline, the Chief Inspector, in consultation with the Environmental Inspector, will determine 
appropriate procedures to be implemented to control soil erosion and other soil handling problems 
encountered. One or more of the following contingency measures listed below will be implemented as 
appropriate. Similar procedures should be followed during the operational phase of the pipeline. 

 
Concern Mitigative Options 

Water Erosion - 
Cultivated / Hay Land 

1. Shut down construction until the risk of erosion has been reduced or the 
conditions improve. 

 2. Construct temporary berms of subsoil, sandbags or bales during 
construction activities. 

 3. Salvage remaining topsoil and store away from area to be regraded. 

 4. Construct temporary cross ditches if approved by landowner. 

5. Install temporary berms of subsoil, logs, timbers, sandbags or bales 
during construction activities. 

Water Erosion - Hay 
Land, Pasture, Bush, 
Bush-Pasture 6. Install silt fences near the base of slopes. 

 7. Salvage remaining topsoil and store away from area to be regraded. 

 8. Regrade rills and gullies. 

 9. Replace salvaged topsoil. 

 10. Implement one or a combination of the following mitigative techniques: 

 • construct cross ditches and berms decreasing the spacing on 
steeper slopes or on more erodible soils; 

 • armour the upslope face of berms with geotextile, logs or sandbags; 

 • import small diameter slash then spread and walk down; 

 • apply netting, mulch or tackifier to hold soil; 

 • reseed and hand rake an annual cover crop, hydroseed or apply 
seed impregnated mats; 

 • transplant native shrubs, plant willow stakes or use other 
bioengineering techniques; and 

 • install slope indicators at locations where the risk of slope failure, or 
creep exists; consult a geotechnical engineer. 

Wind Erosion - Topsoil 11. Shut down or relocate construction activities until winds dissipate and 
conditions improve. 

 12. Consider using the following techniques if wind erosion of the topsoil 
windrow is of concern: 

 • apply water to the topsoil windrow; 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-11 
 
 

Concern Mitigative Options 

 • windrow snow over the topsoil windrow; 

 • tackify (at rate recommended by the distributor) the topsoil windrow; 
or 

 • pack the topsoil windrow with a sheepsfoot packer or other suitable 
equipment. 

 13. Consider using the following techniques if wind erosion is of concern 
after topsoil replacement: 

 • seed cereal or sterile hybrid cover crop; 

 • employ straw crimping at 2-2.5 tonnes/ha; 

 • apply hydromulch or tackifier; 

 • use a packing roller (e.g., Accuroller) to lightly compact sandy or 
pulverized soils on native prairie lands. 

 • import small diameter slash for use as rollback - walk down slash; 

 • add locally available manure and cultivate; and 

 • install wind fences. 

14. Implement one or a combination of the following mitigative techniques: Erosion of or Failure of 
Streambanks • plant willow stakes in the spring; 

 • transplant willow clumps, install willow wattles, or brush layering; 

 • apply netting or netting with straw mulch complete with seed mix; 

 • install log cribwall bank protection; 

 • armour bank with rock riprap;  

 • install vegetated geogrid; 

 • install rock gabions; or 

 • reconstruct stream profile to remove scour holes or instream 
obstructions. 

  
 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-12 
 
 

7.0 SOIL/SOD PULVERIZATION CONTINGENCY PLAN 
Where warranted, the NEB will be notified as soon as practical that contingency measures have been 
implemented during the construction of the pipeline component of the Alberta Clipper Project. 

Criteria for Implementation 
Pulverization may occur on unstripped well-sodded lands, particularly on sandy soil and on cultivated 
lands with clay soils. The Soil/Sod Pulverization Contingency Plan will be implemented where sod 
integrity or topsoil on cultivated lands has been disturbed to the extent that the sod will not infill naturally 
in a reasonable time frame, or there is an unacceptably high risk of soil erosion. The following 
contingency measures will be implemented where there is no compaction in the subsoil and no need to 
fully strip topsoil from the area. Locations along the pipeline route where these measures apply will be 
determined by the Environmental Inspector in consultation with the landowner. 

1. Lightly cultivate the affected areas in two directions with a spike cultivator or a scarifier mounted on a 
grader. 

2. Ensure that the area of cultivation is approximately 1 m wider than the disturbed area. 

3. Harrow the area to prepare a seed bed. 

4. Drill or broadcast seed the area as appropriate and lightly harrow the area again to cover all seed and 
compact the seed bed. 

5. Straw crimp, if necessary, on erosion prone soils. 
 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-13 
 
 

8.0 SILTATION OF WATERCOURSES CONTINGENCY PLAN 
Enbridge's Environmental Inspector will notify the Chief Inspector that contingency measures have been 
initiated and will maintain a record of the location, timing and reason for implementation of the 
contingency plan. Appropriate authorities such as AENV, SENV, Manitoba Conservation, DFO and the 
NEB will be notified as soon as practical, by the Environmental Inspector or Chief Inspector, that 
contingency measures have been implemented during the construction of the pipeline (see Tables 6D-1 
to 6D-3 in Appendix 6D of this ESA). See also the Flood and Excessive Flow Contingency Plan 
(Section 1.0 of Appendix 6B of this ESA). 

Should an extreme precipitation/streamflow event threaten, or other circumstances occur which may 
render the existing sediment control measures inadequate, the procedures outlined below will be 
implemented progressively or individually as warranted. 

1. Prohibit the operation of construction equipment close to the banks of watercourses where there is a 
risk of bank sloughing, failure of the vehicle crossing or flooding of the work area. 

2. Install additional silt fencing to prevent silt-laden water from entering watercourse. 

3. Excavate cross ditches to divert runoff away from watercourses. 

4. Construct berms of subsoil, sandbags, rock, timber, straw bales or hay bales on approach slopes 
and/or banks to divert runoff from the right-of-way and onto well-vegetated lands. The location and 
material of the sediment control structures will be determined by the Environmental Inspector.   

5. Import sand bags and place strategically to help stabilize and add height to banks to prevent flooding 
of nearby areas, especially where vegetation has been removed. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-14 
 
 

9.0 SPILL CONTINGENCY PLAN 
The Chief Inspector and Environmental Inspector will immediately notify the applicable provincial and 
federal government agencies and the NEB of the spill as required by law when a reportable event occurs 
during the construction of any component of the Alberta Clipper Project (see Tables 6D-1 to 6D-3 of 
Appendix 6D of this ESA). If this is not possible, notification will be made as soon as practical.  

In Alberta, a reportable spill event is defined by the Alberta Environmental Protection and Enhancement 
Act as: 

• The release has caused, is causing or may cause impairment of or damage to the environment, 
human health or safety, or property; 

• The amount exceeds the quantities or emission levels set out for the substance (see Material Safety 
Data Sheets [MSDS]); 

• The release is into a watercourse or into the groundwater or surface water in any quantity; and/or 

• The release is 200 L or more (Transportation of Dangerous Goods Act, 1992 immediate reporting 
quantity for flammable liquids (class 3). 

In Saskatchewan, a reportable spill event is defined by The Environmental Management and Protection 
Act, 2002 (The Environmental Spill Control Regulations) as:  

• Any substance that is discharged into the environment that may cause, is causing or has caused an 
adverse effect; and  

• The release is 100 L or more (Environmental Spill Control Regulations immediate reporting quantity 
for petroleum and petroleum products) 

In Manitoba, a reportable spill event is defined by the Dangerous Goods Handling and Transportation Act 
(Environmental Accident Reporting Regulation), as: 

• The release has caused, is causing or may cause an impairment of or damage to the environment, 
human health or safety, or property; 

• The amount exceeds the quantities to emission levels set out for the substance (see MSDS); 

• The release is into a watercourse or into the groundwater or surface water in any quantity; and/or 

• The release is 100 L or more (Dangerous Goods Handling and Transportation Act (Environmental 
Accident Reporting Regulation), immediate reporting quantity for flammable liquids (class 3). 

Contaminated sites will be assessed, remediation designed and disposal sites identified in accordance 
with documents from the CCME as applicable. These documents will be provided to the Chief Inspector 
and Environmental Inspectors as part of the Environmental Education Program. Emergency contacts are 
presented in Tables 6D-1 to 6D-3 of Appendix 6D of this ESA. 

9.1 Introduction 

Guidelines for the safe handling, storage, use and disposal of potentially hazardous materials as well as 
spill prevention measures and guidelines for the refuelling and servicing of equipment are provided in 
Enbridge's Waste Management Plan presently on file with the NEB.  



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-15 
 
 

9.2 General Measures 

The following are standard measures to be adhered to during construction of the Alberta Clipper Project: 

1. Appropriate spill equipment will be maintained at all worksites. The risk potential for site-specific spills 
will be used to determine the appropriate type of response equipment to be stored onsite and suitable 
location for storage. 

2. Specific instructions regarding applicable contacts and appropriate response actions to be taken in 
the event of a spill will be posted at the field construction office. 

9.3 Initial Response 

The following actions will be taken upon detection of a spill. 

1. In the event of a spill of hazardous material, the first person on the scene will follow the actions 
presented in the Spill Scene Checklist. 

2. When notified of a spill, the Chief Inspector / Environmental Inspector will immediately ensure that: 
• action is taken to control danger to human life  

• an onsite safety Manager is designated;  

• the appropriate provincial disaster services, local police and/or RCMP have been notified;  

• the necessary equipment and personnel are mobilized, and measures are being implemented to 
stop the source of the spill, if safe to do so, and commence clean-up; and 

• applicable provincial and federal agencies and the NEB are immediately notified of the spill. 

3. The Contractor will make all resources available to contain and clean-up the spill. 

4. Once the emergency contacts are made and the initial efforts to contain and clean-up the spill are 
underway, the Chief Inspector / Environmental Inspector will notify Enbridge's Environment, Health 
and Safety staff. 

9.4 General Spill Containment Procedures 

The successful containment of a spill on land or water depends on a variety of factors including: ground 
cover and topography, hydrogeology, solubility of the material, viscosity of the liquid, water currents, soil 
permeability and climatic conditions.  

The following general guidelines will be followed for containment of most hazardous materials. 

1. The first person on the scene will follow the actions listed in the Spill Scene Checklist. 

2. Assess the safety hazards of the situation. 

3. Remove sources of ignition, if safe to do so. 

4. Identify the product, stop source and physically contain spill as soon as safe to do so. 

5. Avoid use of water or fire extinguishing chemicals on nonpetroleum product spills since many 
chemicals react violently with water and chemical extinguishing agents may release toxic fumes. In 
addition, chemicals may be soluble in water and dispersal makes containment and clean-up more 
difficult. 

6. Minimize traffic on contaminated soils. 

7. Use natural depressions or berms constructed with materials and equipment in proximity to the site to 
physically contain a spill on land. Deployment of booms will be necessary on water. 

8. Clean-up will not be attempted without advice from Enbridge's Environment, Health and Safety staff.  



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-16 
 
 

9.4.1 Transportation by Truck 

The general guidelines listed below will be followed for the containment of materials spilled from a truck. 

1. Contain spilled petroleum product. 

2. Pump tanker dry (into appropriate containers or another tanker). 

3. Remove tanker from site. 

4. Pick up spilled product. 

5. Clean-up contaminated area. 

6. Dispose of sorbent pads, heavily contaminated soil and vegetation at an approved facility. On lightly 
contaminated soil areas where remediation is feasible, add amendments, repeat as required, sample 
soil and seed as appropriate. Repeat as required. 

9.4.2 Spills Adjacent to or into a Watercourse or Wetland 

The general guidelines listed below will be followed for spills adjacent to or into a watercourse or wetland. 

1. Construct berms and/or trenches to contain spilled product prior to entry into a watercourse or 
wetland. 

2. Deploy booms, skimmers, sorbents, etc., if feasible, to contain and recover spilled material from a 
watercourse or wetland. 

3. Pick up spilled product. 

4. Clean-up contaminated area including downstream shorelines. 

5. Dispose of heavily contaminated soil and vegetation at an approved facility. On lightly contaminated 
soil areas where in situ restoration is feasible, fertilize and then cultivate beyond depth of 
contamination. Repeat as required. 

9.4.3 Spot Spills 

Impacts from small spot spills can generally be minimized if appropriate actions are implemented. All 
small spills of fuels or noxious materials must be reported immediately to the Environmental Inspector. 

1. Suspend construction activity and travel in the immediate vicinity of a spot spill until permission to 
resume activity has been granted by the Environmental Inspector. 

2. The Environmental Inspector, in consultation with Enbridge's Environment, Health and Safety staff, 
will determine appropriate methods to remove or restore contaminated soils. Soil and vegetation 
heavily contaminated with petroleum products will be incinerated or disposed of at an approved 
facility. 

3. Locations where spot spills occur are to be flagged or otherwise marked to ensure that post-
construction monitoring of the site can be undertaken. 

4. Lightly contaminated soil areas where restoration is feasible will be fertilized and then cultivated to a 
depth below the depth of contamination, then repeated as required. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-17 
 
 

SPILL SCENE CHECKLIST 

Note: The following activities should be taken by the first person on the scene of a hazardous material 
spill or release or a spill of other potentially deleterious material into a watercourse or wetland or 
environmentally sensitive area. 

 

(a) If possible without further assistance, assess the safety hazards of the 
situation, control danger to human life and identify the composition (see 
Spill Report Form - next page) of the spilled material. ________ 

(b) If feasible and safe to do so, remove any sources of ignition, cut off the 
source of the spill and initiate a release response plan (i.e., control, 
contain and clean-up). While efforts have been initiated to contain the 
spill, immediately notify the Chief Inspector and Environmental Inspector. 
If the Chief Inspector cannot be immediately contacted, notify Enbridge's 
Environment, Health and Safety staff. These people will, in turn, contact 
the appropriate authority as well as applicable federal and provincial 
agencies and the NEB.  ________ 

(c) Once the source has been cut off, attempt to contain the spilled material. ________ 

(d) Before any reports are filed, take notice of dangers to the environment 
(e.g., proximity of watercourses) and clean-up actions that might be 
necessary. ________ 

(e) If any of the above is beyond the capabilities at hand, do not hesitate to 
ask for qualified assistance. ________ 

(f) In Alberta, a written report must be submitted directly to the Monitoring 
Division of the Alberta Energy and Utilities Board within seven (7) days of 
verbally reporting an unrefined or refined product release, if the release 
has caused, is causing, or may cause adverse effect on environment. If 
the release is fully contained on site, or there are no adverse effects, then 
a written report is not required. ________ 

(g)  In Saskatchewan, an immediate verbal report is required to 
Saskatchewan Environment by telephone at (800) 667-7525. A written 
report is required within seven (7) days of verbal report. ________ 

(h)  In Manitoba, an immediate verbal report is required to the Manitoba 
Department of Environment and Workplace Safety and Health in 
Winnipeg at (204) 944-4888 (24 hour emergency line). Where requested 
to do so by an environment officer, a written report shall also be filed with 
the department. Federally, Transportation Canada (Dangerous Goods 
requires a written report be made to the Director General within 30 days, 
The Canadian Environmental Protection Act also requires a written report, 
to be made to the Regional Director (Prairie and Northern Region).   ________ 

 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-18 
 
 

EXAMPLE OF SPILL REPORT FORM 

Type of Material Spilled: 
Gasoline   
Diesel   
Lube Oil   
Hydraulic Fluid   
Vehicle Antifreeze   
Developing Fluids   
Other (specify)   

 
Date and Time of Spill or Discovery:   
Source of Spill:   
Area of Spill (m2):   
Depth of Spill (cm):   
Volume of Spill (L):   
Estimated Release Rate:   
Duration of Release:   
Location (land, water, land and water):   
Soil Type (e.g., sandy, clay, etc.):   
Legal Location: LSD _____ Sec _____ Twp _____ Rg _____ W_____M; KP______ 
 
Land Use:   
 
Environmentally sensitive areas potentially affected:   
  
 
Weather conditions at time of discovery:   
 
Procedures taken to minimize, control or stop the release:   
  
  
 
Remediation plan and schedule of implementation, if required:   
  
  
 
Current status of the remediation program:   
 
(dd/mm/yy) (hr:min):   
 
Form Completed by: 
Name: _____________________________ (printed) _______________________________ (signed) 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-19 
 
 

10.0 DIRECTIONAL DRILLING PROCEDURES AND INSTREAM DRILLING 
MUD RELEASE CONTINGENCY PLAN 

An accidental release of drilling mud into a watercourse could adversely affect the environment. The 
following contingency plan has been developed to ensure that appropriate measures are in place to 
minimize the risk of adverse impacts during directional drilling of the South Saskatchewan, Qu'Appelle 
and Souris rivers. 

Both the Contractor and Enbridge must be diligent during all aspects of directional drilling to ensure that 
the potential for an instream drilling mud release is minimized; or if it does occur, that environmental 
impacts are minimized. 

Should the Contractor have an instream drilling mud release contingency plan in place, both plans will be 
reviewed by Enbridge with the Contractor to ensure that the most stringent conditions of both plans apply. 

10.1 General Measures 

1. Ensure that supervisory personnel are aware of this contingency plan prior to commencement of 
drilling activity. 

2. Arrange for access beyond the boundaries of the pipeline project’s surface rights agreement along 
the drill path to monitor, contain and clean up potential frac-out releases. 

3. Install surface casing at the entry point to a depth that extends beyond the coarsest material, if 
warranted. 

4. Ensure that drilling mud composition is limited to bentonite mud drilling systems, fresh water and, if 
warranted, other inert additives. No toxic additives will be allowed. Provide MSDS to Enbridge upon 
request. 

5. Construct a sump at the entry point and a subsoil berm downslope of the proposed exit point with a 
capacity adequate to capture anticipated volumes of drilling mud that could be released during 
pullback and other drilling operations. Construct a sump with the above noted capacity, at the exit 
point after the pilot hole has been completed.  

6. Install surface casing at the exit point if coarse textured near surface deposits could interfere with 
drilling mud circulation. 

7. Develop a clean-up plan, prior to drilling. The plan will be prepared by the drilling contractor in 
consultation with Enbridge inspection staff, as well as the DFO Fisheries Biologist. Acquire the 
appropriate approvals to access the release area if off right-of-way and for mud pump-off. 

8. Reclaim entry and exit sumps that contained drilling mud immediately after completion of drilling and 
remediate to meet applicable Alberta EUB Directive 050 Waste Management Guidelines. 

 

10.2 Emergency Response Equipment 

1. Maintain the following equipment onsite in sufficient quantities during drilling operation to contain any 
inadvertent drilling mud releases: 

• sandbags; 

• filter cloth (e.g., silt fence); 

• T-bar posts; 

• post pounders; 

• straw bales; 

• light towers; 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-20 
 
 

• shovels; 

• 6 mil polyethylene; and 

• 2-trash pumps c/w sufficient lengths of leak free hose and suction heads. 

2. Maintain vacuum truck(s) onsite during pullback operations. 

3. Maintain the appropriate water quality sampling equipment onsite during drilling operation to ensure 
that accurate water quality samples are taken. Onsite equipment to be provided by Enbridge or their 
contractor(s) may include:  

• turbidity meter; 

• sampling pole; 

• chest waders; 

• water sample bottles; 

• ice auger; 

• boat; and 

• coolers. 

4. Ensure that the water quality sampling program is in place prior to drilling and includes the following 
information: 

• sample locations (both an upstream control site as well as appropriate downstream 
sites); 

• frequency of sampling; and 

• sampling procedures. 

The program will be amended if warranted by conditions. 

5. Ensure that three (min.) sets of walkie-talkies with spare batteries are onsite and available for use in 
monitoring operations. 

10.3 Monitoring 

1. Supervisory personnel will be onsite at all times during drilling, reaming and pullback operations to 
ensure that emergency response measures will be implemented immediately and effectively. 
Enbridge will also assign inspection personnel to the site during all phases of drilling of the 
watercourse. 

2. Monitor and record the amount of fluid return to the mud tank/pit and the amount of make up drilling 
fluid required in the mixing tanks during drilling of the pilot hole and hole opening (reaming). Maintain 
a detailed log of all drilling activities in order to correlate drilling status with potential frac-out events. 

3. Monitor both onshore and instream portions of the drill path and surrounding area (i.e., within 400 m 
minimum) for signs of drilling mud release. The size of the area to be monitored will be determined by 
evaluating geotechnical conditions (i.e., amount of fracturing, type and depth of substrate) and drilling 
conditions (i.e., depth of drill path, distance between watercourse and entry and exit points). 
Monitoring will be on a continuous basis during drilling operations and will continue for at least 
12 hours after shut-down. Personnel equipped with walkie-talkies shall be positioned at the most 
advantageous locations to observe any sign of a release of drilling mud to the surface or in the 
watercourse. 

4. Ensure that contact is maintained at all times between monitoring and drilling personnel. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-21 
 
 

5. Establish monitoring stations at the following locations and obtain water samples for visual inspection 
at the noted intervals if pressurized drilling fluids or water are used. 

 
Up And Downstream 

Monitoring Sample Sites 
Sampling Interval 

(approx.) 
25 m (approx.) 2 hours 
100 m (approx.) 2 hours 
200 m (approx.) 4 hours 
400 m (approx.) 4 hours 

 
Increase the sampling frequency if monitoring of drilling mud returns indicates that a release may 
have occurred. 

6. On watercourses with ice cover, onsite conditions may allow visual monitoring of water quality by 
observing open reaches or, if safe, by augering and maintaining an open hole in the ice for sampling. 
Supply monitors with practical safety gear (e.g., ropes, ladders, inflatable boat, flotation coveralls) for 
traversing ice. Continue to evaluate ice conditions throughout the monitoring program. If open 
reaches are not available for monitoring and ice cover is not safe, notify the provincial and DFO 
fisheries biologists. 

7. If the watercourse is frozen to the bottom, onsite conditions will not allow visual monitoring of water 
quality by observing open reaches or by augering and maintaining an open hole in the ice for 
sampling. Continue to visually monitor areas where early detection of a frac-out would most likely 
occur (e.g., at the base of coniferous trees overhanging the watercourse). 

10.4 Emergency Response 

The loss of drilling mud into seams of coarse material, fissures, etc. routinely occurs during drilling 
operations. Since drilling fluid does not always flow to the surface, a loss does not necessarily indicate 
that the drilling mud has been released onto near shore areas or into the watercourse. Nevertheless, a 
release of drilling mud into a watercourse can adversely affect fish and fish habitat. 

1. Suspend drilling operations immediately if excessive loss of drilling mud is noted and conduct a 
detailed examination of the drill path and surrounding area for evidence of a release to the surface.  

2. Immediately notify the Chief Inspector and the Environmental Inspector if a drilling mud release is 
observed.  

3. If the amount of mud released is not great enough to allow practical collection, the mud release will 
be allowed to dry and dissipate naturally. 

4. If the drilling mud release enters a watercourse, the Chief Inspector will immediately notify Enbridge’s 
Engineering staff, the Saskatchewan Environmental Response Centre and the Manitoba 
Environmental Response Centre. The Environmental Inspector will immediately notify the provincial 
and DFO fisheries biologists. Enbridge will notify affected landowners, tenants and/or the appropriate 
land authority. Any drilling mud release that enters waters or that may cause or is causing an adverse 
effect is reportable to SENV or Manitoba Conservation. 

Federal Fisheries Biologist for the South Saskatchewan  
and Qu'Appelle rivers (Bruce Howard) (306) 780-8724 
Federal Fisheries Biologist for the Souris River (Keith Kristofferson) (204) 984-8891 
Saskatchewan Provincial Fisheries Biologist for  
the South Saskatchewan River (Jennifer Merkowsky) (306) 933-7943 
Saskatchewan Provincial Fisheries Biologist for the  
Qu'Appelle River (Al McCutcheon) (306) 728-7491 
Manitoba Provincial Fisheries Biologist (Bruno Brudelin) (204) 726-6452 
Saskatchewan Emergency Response Line 1-800-667-7525 
Manitoba Emergency Response Line (204) 944-4888 
 

5. Contain and further prevent drilling mud from entering the watercourse from near shore areas by 
installing a berm of subsoil, sandbags or other material approved by the Environmental Inspector. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-22 
 
 

6. Conduct water quality sampling as directed by the Environmental Inspector. Instream and near-shore 
containment/cleanup objectives include the following:  

Instream: 
1) Divert streamflow around the mud release to the extent practical. 
2) Install silt fencing around the exit point(s), if feasible. 
3) Remove mud from the watercourse by pumping, shovels or with a hoe. 
4) Dispose of mud in accordance with provincial requirements. 
 

Onshore: 
1) Contain the mud release immediately to limit the area affected and prevent the mud from 

entering the watercourse. 
2) Dispose of mud. 
 

Consider the following options for diverting streamflow from the mud release area. 
1) Install aquadams on the upstream side of the release point on larger watercourses. 
2) Construct a dam and pump set-up on smaller watercourses. 
3) Install a flume to divert water past the release area. 
4) Install coffer dams made of sand bags or sheet metal. 
5) Attempt to contain the release point within an area isolated with aquadams or sheet metal, 

etc. 
 

Consider the following options for removal of mud from instream. 
1) Use trash pumps or hydrovac truck. If trash pumps are used, ensure that the pump-off area 

does not drain directly into watercourse or construct a holding area. If a hydrovac truck is 
used, ensure that all activities comply with the guidelines in the Alberta EUB G-050 Drilling 
Waste Management Guidelines and ID 99-05. 

2) In consultation with provincial and DFO fisheries biologists, leave mud in place if current 
streamflow levels inhibit removal operations or removal will result in unacceptable terrain or 
instream damage.  

 
For onshore mud release, consider the following options for immediate containment. 

1) If accessible by heavy equipment, immediately construct berms or excavate a sump for 
containment. 

2) If not accessible by heavy equipment, construct bale and filter cloth weirs and a 
containment area where appropriate. 

 
Before allowing filtered water to enter the watercourse, ensure that the TSS level is within 10 mg/L of the 
background TSS levels. 

Enbridge inspection staff will prepare a report summarizing the events leading up to the release as well 
as measures taken following the release to minimize impacts on the environment.  

10.5 Plans for Potential Continuance of Drilling 

Drilling will only be allowed to resume if the potential for significant adverse impacts on the environment is 
low, as determined by the Enbridge project management, inspection staff, the Fisheries Resource 
Specialist, drilling or geotechnical consultant (if warranted) and the drilling contractor, and as approved by 
the DFO fisheries biologist. 

1. Implement measures to prevent the further release of drilling mud into the watercourse. Appropriate 
measures will vary depending on the lessons learned during the previous drill attempt. 

Progressively implement the following measures to prevent the further release of drilling mud into the 
watercourse. 

a) Ensure that appropriate structures, materials, equipment and personnel are in place and 
available in the event of a subsequent release of drilling mud. 

b) Reduce drilling mud pressures if practical. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-23 
 
 

c) Plug fissures/fracture with inert sealers or plugging agents pumped into the drill hole and 
left undisturbed for an appropriate period of time whereupon drilling will be resumed. If the 
sealing agents are not successful, drilling will be suspended and the plan reviewed and 
revised. 

d) Employ downhole cementing to either seal off the problem zone for redrilling or seal off a 
large portion of the existing drill hole to a point where a new drill path (generally at a lower 
elevation) can be attempted. If these measures are unsuccessful, then drilling will be 
suspended and the plan reviewed and revised. 

e) Move the drill and attempt to redrill from a new location employing the same protection 
measures implemented on the initial drill if conditions indicate that a second drill will be 
successful. Prior to commencing the redrill, the proposed drill path will be reviewed and 
revised accordingly. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-24 
 
 

11.0 FISH AND BIVALVE SPECIES OF CONCERN DISCOVERY 
CONTINGENCY PLAN 

Fish Species of Concern Discovery Prior to Construction 
Depending upon the pipeline construction schedule, supplemental fish and aquatic habitat studies in 2007 
may be necessary if watercourse construction will occur during the restricted instream activity period or if 
the recommended water crossing method(s) outside of the restricted activity period is not technically or 
economically feasible (e.g., due to anticipated high flows during the planned water crossing construction 
period or subsurface materials are not suitable for a trenchless crossing). In the event that sensitive fish 
habitats are discovered during the survey, the discovery will be assessed by a qualified aquatic 
environment specialist based on the following criteria: 

• position of the fish habitat feature with respect to the proposed crossing; 

• the timing of construction versus the timing constraints for the fish species; and 

• the potential for an alteration of construction activities to minimize disturbance. 

Once the assessment is completed, DFO and provincial fish biologists will be notified to discuss site-
specific mitigative options. The mitigative measures prepared for watercourse crossings as outlined in 
Section 6.2.6 of this ESA are based on a conservative approach. The mitigative measures available 
include the following: 

• abide by timing constraints for sensitive life history periods; 

• alter construction activities to partial bypass or trenchless crossing techniques (e.g., 
HDD, bore); 

• implement temporary and/or permanent erosion control measures (e.g., geotextiles, silt 
fences, temporary berms) to prevent increased sediment loading; 

• restore bank cover by planting shrubs;  

• alter vehicle crossing methods to minimize disturbance (i.e., use existing bridges or 
install temporary bridge); and 

• if deemed warranted and, for an authorization for the harmful alteration, disruption or 
destruction of fish habitat. Compensate loss of habitat and monitor to conform that 
compensation was effective. 

The Fish, Bivalve and Aquatic Surveys report will outline appropriate mitigation to be implemented at 
each applicable watercourse crossing. If warranted, the Environmental Alignment Sheets will be amended 
to incorporate these mitigative measures. 

Bivalve Species of Concern Discovery Prior to Construction 
A study to determine the species of bivalves present in the vicinity of the Souris River, Oak Creek 
(KP 1109.3) and Deadhorse Creek crossings will be undertaken in spring of 2007. Further studies may 
also be warranted in the year of construction if the watercourse is to be crossed with a trenched crossing 
method. In the event that that bivalve species of concern are discovered during the study, the discovery 
will be assessed by a qualified aquatic environment specialist based on the following criteria: 

• position of the bivalve with respect to the proposed crossing; and 

• the potential for an alteration of construction activities to minimize disturbance. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-25 
 
 

Once the assessment is completed, Environment Canada, DFO and provincial fish biologists will be 
notified to discuss site-specific mitigative options. The mitigative measures available include the following: 

• depending on the season, alter construction activities to trenchless crossing techniques 
(e.g., HDD); and 

• collect bivalves of concern within the zone of influence of the crossing and move the 
bivalves to an upstream location with similar habitat characteristics. 

The Fish, Bivalve and Aquatic Habitat Surveys report will outline appropriate mitigation to be implemented 
at each applicable watercourse crossing. The Environmental Alignment Sheets will be amended, if 
warranted, to incorporate these mitigative measures. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-26 
 
 

12.0 PLANT SPECIES OF CONCERN DISCOVERY CONTINGENCY PLAN 
In the event that rare vascular plants, or plant communities are discovered during future vegetation 
studies scheduled for 2007 along the pipeline route, the plant or community will be assessed and 
appropriate mitigative measures will be determined prior to construction of the pipeline. The appropriate 
mitigative measures will be determined following an assessment, which will include the following: 

• the position of the plant or community on the right-of-way; 

• the relative rarity of the plant or community (regionally, nationally etc.); 

• the local abundance of the plant or community; 

• the growth habit and propagation strategy of the plant or community; and 

• the habitat preferences of the plant or community. 

The suite of mitigative options (i.e., staged mitigation) that may be implemented is outlined in Detail 6B-1 
and includes the following: 

• narrow down the proposed area of disturbance and protect the site using fencing or 
clearly mark the site using flagging;  

• inform all users of access restrictions along native vegetation segments and in the 
vicinity of flagged or fenced sites; 

• temporarily cover the site with geotextile pads, flex net, or swamp mats; 

• extend road or watercourse bores to avoid or minimize impact on the site; 

• realign the route to avoid the site; or 

• propagate rare plants or specific portions of sensitive communities, via vegetative or 
reproductive means (e.g., harvesting of seed from the right-of-way or adjacent area, 
salvaging and transplanting portions of sod and surrounding vegetation or collecting of 
cuttings). 

The Rare Vascular Plant and Plant Community Survey report will outline appropriate mitigation to be 
implemented at each site. The Environmental Alignment Sheets will be amended, if warranted, to 
incorporate these mitigative measures. 



 
CRITERIA FOR IMPLEMENTATION 
 
Protection measures and environmental management techniques for rare plants and sensitive plant communities will be 
based on site-specific conditions and species sensitivity criteria. Final decisions on mitigative measures will be made by 
Enbridge in consultation with botanical experts, and where appropriate, the land authority. Mitigative measures generally 
fall into categories of avoidance, minimizing disturbance and alternative reclamation techniques. The following mitigative 
measures and options will be considered in the order presented: 
 
 
1. Preliminary assessment and protection will include the following steps in all cases. 

• Expand field survey of the area to identify whether the species or community is found only within the pipeline 
construction right-of-way, or extends beyond it. 

• Consult with ANHIC, SK CDC, MB CDC and vegetation experts to verify the status ranking, known distribution, 
plant species requirements, etc., and to discuss the type of terrain and the construction constraints. 

• Stake and fence off individuals or populations on the right-of-way. This will be done as soon after identification 
as feasible, to protect rare plants during the pre-construction phase as well as during the construction and 
reclamation phases. 

 
 
2. For S1 or S1S2 ranked rare plant species, complete protection is preferred. The mitigation strategy includes the 

following options in order of preference. One or more options may be used at a site. 
• Consider narrowing down the planned area of disturbance to avoid individuals or populations occurring on the 

right-of-way or temporary workspace if the species can be fully protected during and after construction, or if a 
viable, self-sustaining population occurs beyond the right-of-way (Detail 6A-1 in Appendix 6A). 

• Consider a minor realignment of the pipeline or a change in the work side in the immediate area of the 
vegetation to be protected. 

• Consider boring beneath the site and providing alternative measures for equipment to travel past the area of 
concern (e.g., protection matting, temporary bridge, drive around). 

• Consider employing appropriate salvage, propagation and transplant techniques (including transplanting the 
target species surrounded by an island of native vegetation), as directed by Enbridge’s Vegetation Consultant 
(Detail 6A-2, 6A-3, 6A-4 in Appendix 6A). 

 
 
3. For S2, S2S3, S1S3, S3, SH and SU ranked rare plant species, the mitigation strategy includes the following options 

in order of preference. One or more options may be used at a site. 
• Consider narrowing down the planned area of disturbance to avoid individuals or populations occurring on the 

right-of-way or temporary workspace if the species can be fully protected during construction, or if a viable, self-
sustaining population occurs beyond the right-of-way (Detail 6A-1 in Appendix 6A). 

• Consider employing appropriate salvage, propagation and transplant techniques, as directed by Enbridge's 
Vegetation Consultant (Detail 6A-2, 6A-4 in Appendix 6A). 

• Consider traffic restrictions to minimize the amount and type of traffic disturbance. 
• Consider using geotextiles and/or protective matting over the travel lane and spoil pile area to protect 

populations or habitats from scraping and compacting (Detail 6A-3 in Appendix 6A). 
 
 
4. For sensitive plant communities the mitigation strategy includes the following options in order of preference. One or 

more options may be used at a site. 
• Consider narrowing down the planned area of disturbance to avoid individuals or populations occurring on the 

right-of-way or temporary workspace. Employ the appropriate salvage, propagation and transplant and 
restoration techniques, as directed by Enbridge’s Vegetation Consultant (Detail 6A-1 in Appendix 6A). 

 
 

 
ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT 

VASCULAR PLANT SPECIES OF CONCERN AND  
SENSITIVE PLANT COMMUNITY MITIGATION 

 
4462 April 2007 Detail 6B-1 

 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-28 
 
 

13.0 WILDLIFE SPECIES OF CONCERN DISCOVERY CONTINGENCY PLAN  

Wildlife Species of Concern Discovery Prior to Construction 
In the event that wildlife species of concern or their site-specific habitat is discovered during future wildlife 
studies in 2007 along the pipeline route and at Hardisty Terminal, the discovery will be assessed and 
appropriate mitigation measures will be determined. Table 6B-3 of this ESA lists wildlife species of 
concern and provides examples of associated habitat features that may require special protection or 
measures if discovered. The wildlife or habitat will be assessed based on the following criteria: 

• the position of the wildlife or habitat feature with respect to the proposed area of 
development; 

• the presence of topographic features or vegetation to effectively screen the wildlife or 
habitat from construction activities; 

• the timing of construction versus the critical timing constraints for the species; and 

• the potential for an alteration of construction activities to minimize or avoid sensory 
disturbance. 

The mitigative measures available include the following: 

• abide by federal timing constraints within the recommended set back distances; 

• abide by daily timing restrictions on construction activities; 

• narrow down the proposed area of disturbance and protect the site using fencing or 
clearly mark the site using flagging; 

• alter or delay construction activities to avoid sensory disturbance (e.g., no burning); 

• extend road or watercourse bores to avoid or minimize effects on the site; 

• inform all users of access restrictions in the vicinity of flagged or fenced sites; 

• realign the route to avoid the site; 

• salvage and transplant vegetation or native seed of critical importance to wildlife 
species of concern where the habitat could not be avoided; 

• install nest boxes or platforms or otherwise replace or enhance habitat during 
reclamation or restoration; and 

• relocate nests or other habitat features or individuals if practical and monitor post-
construction response. 

The Wildlife and Wildlife Habitat Surveys for Species of Concern report will outline the appropriate 
mitigation to be implemented at each site. If warranted, the Environmental Alignment Sheets will be 
amended to incorporate these mitigative measures.  

Wildlife Species of Concern Discovery During Pipeline Construction 
In the event that wildlife species of concern or their site-specific habitat is discovered during construction 
of the pipeline, the discovery will be assessed and appropriate mitigation measures from the list above 
will be determined.  

Wildlife species of concern and their habitat characteristics will be identified in the Environmental 
Education Program for the Environmental Inspectors. The Environmental Inspectors will be provided with 
detailed information on identifying wildlife species of concern and their site-specific habitat.  

In the event that wildlife species of concern or their site-specific habitat are discovered during 
construction of the pipeline, follow the measures outlined below.  



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-29 
 
 

1. Suspend work immediately in the vicinity of any newly discovered wildlife species of concern. Work at 
that location may not resume until the measures below are undertaken. 

2. Notify the Environmental Inspector who will notify the Chief Inspector. 

3. The Environmental Inspector will assess the discovery and either allow construction to be resumed 
or, in the event of a confirmed or potential discovery, proceed by notifying: 
• applicable government agencies (e.g., ASRD, SENV, Manitoba Conservation, Environment 

Canada) as required (see Tables 6D-1 to 6D-3 in Appendix 6D of this ESA); and 

• Enbridge's Wildlife Consultant. 

4. Enbridge's Wildlife Consultant may deem it necessary to visit the site and will, regardless of whether 
a site visit is warranted, develop an appropriate mitigation plan in consultation with Enbridge's 
Environment, Health and Safety staff. The mitigative measures available include those listed above. 

 

TABLE 6B-3 
 

WILDLIFE SPECIES OF CONCERN AND EXAMPLES OF ASSOCIATED HABITAT FEATURES 
THAT MAY REQUIRE SPECIAL PROTECTION OR MEASURES IF DISCOVERED 

 
Taxa Species or Groups Examples of Habitat Features 
bird migratory birds active nests, stick nests, cavity nests, staging areas 

 loggerhead shrike, long-billed 
curlew, burrowing owl, sharp-

tailed grouse 

active nests, leks, burrows 

amphibian northern leopard frogs wetlands with signs of active breeding; egg masses 
 

 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-30 
 
 

14.0 WILDLIFE ENCOUNTER CONTINGENCY PLAN 
In the event of an encounter with wildlife during the construction phase of the pipeline, pump additions 
and tank components, either at the construction site or on the commute to and from the construction site, 
follow the measures outlined below. 

1. Report any incidents (e.g., aggressive behaviour, nuisance behaviour) with wildlife to the 
Environmental Inspector who will immediately notify the applicable provincial agency (i.e., ASRD, 
SENV, Manitoba Conservation) and, if warranted, the local police detachment (see Tables 6D-1 
to 6D-3 in Appendix 6D of this ESA).  

2. Report any trapped, injured, or dead animals on the site to the Environmental Inspector. The 
Environmental Inspector will contact the applicable provincial agency to consult on appropriate action.  

3. Report location and details of collisions with wildlife to the Environmental Inspector. The 
Environmental Inspector will notify the applicable provincial authorities and, if warranted, the local 
police detachment (see Tables 6D-1 to 6D-3 in Appendix 6D of this ESA).  

4. Once the preceding contacts have been made, the Environmental Inspector will also contact the 
Enbridge's Environment, Health and Safety staff. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

Page 6B-31 
 
 

15.0 HERITAGE RESOURCE DISCOVERY CONTINGENCY PLAN 

Heritage Resource Discovery Prior to Construction 
In the event that archaeological, historical or palaeontological resources are discovered during the 
heritage resources work scheduled for 2007 along the pipeline route, the sites will be assessed and 
appropriate mitigative measures will be determined. The site will be assessed based on the following 
criteria: 

• the significance of the site; 

• the location of the site with respect to the route; 

• the feasibility of alternate routing or siting to avoid the resource; and 

• the decision of the appropriate authority (i.e., ATPRC; Saskatchewan Culture, Youth and Recreation 
(SCYR); Manitoba Culture, Heritage and Tourism (MCHT). 

Prior to construction of the pipeline, the heritage resources report will specify mitigative measures at each 
site discovered. The proposed mitigation measures will appear on the Environmental Alignment Sheets 
will be amended, if warranted, to incorporate these mitigative measures. 

The mitigative measures that may be implemented include the following: 

• have present a qualified archaeologist or palaeontologist to monitor the trenching operations; 

• narrow down the proposed area of disturbance and protect the site using fencing or clearly mark the 
site using flagging; 

• install geotextile and swamp mat(s) to protect the site; 

• conduct an excavation to salvage and establish an adequate record of the site according to provincial 
heritage resources guidelines; or 

• realign the route or resituate the facility to avoid the site. 

Heritage Resource Discovery During Construction 
In the event that archaeological, historical or palaeontological resources are discovered during 
construction of the pipeline, the Rowatt Pump Station or the tanks at the Hardisty Terminal, the sites will 
be assessed and appropriate mitigative measures will be determined. The site will be assessed based on 
the criteria mentioned above. 

In the event that heritage resources are discovered during construction, follow the measures outlined 
below. 

1. Suspend work immediately in the vicinity of any newly discovered archaeological, palaeontological, 
historical or traditional land use site. Work at that location may not resume until the measures below 
are undertaken. 

2. Notify the Environmental Inspector who will notify the Chief Inspector. 
3. The Environmental Inspector will provide an initial assessment of possible archaeological, 

palaeontological and historical remains and either allow construction to resume or, in the event of a 
confirmed or potential discovery, proceed by notifying: 

• Enbridge's Heritage Resource Specialist;  
• applicable government agencies (e.g., ATPRC, SCYR, MCHT) (see Tables 6D-1 to 6D-3  

in Appendix 6D of this ESA) as required; and 
• local Aboriginal group representative as required (i.e., Swan Lake Ojibway First Nation). 

4. Enbridge's Heritage Resource Specialist may deem it necessary to visit the site and will, regardless of 
whether a site visit is required, develop an appropriate mitigation plan in consultation with Enbridge's 
Environment, Health and Safety staff and, if necessary, the appropriate government agency and local 
Aboriginal group(s). The mitigative measures available include those listed above. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

APPENDIX 6C 
 

TRAFFIC CONTROL PLAN 
 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 
 Page 6C-1  
 
 

TRAFFIC CONTROL PLAN 
The Traffic Control Plan has been prepared to provide guidelines for vehicular use on the pipeline right-
of-way and associated access roads. The purpose of the plan is to minimize the effects of equipment and 
vehicle traffic associated with pipeline development on all lands and particularly on native vegetation, in 
riparian areas and in areas of high erosion hazard.  

1.1 Preconstruction 

1. All motorized vehicles, including all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), will be confined to the construction right-
of-way and approved access roads, shoo-flies or trails except where specifically authorized by the 
landowner and occupant. This restriction also applies to all biophysical inventory and land surveying 
activities. 

2. Travel through areas of high sensitivity (e.g., native prairie) will be primarily on foot. However, ATVs 
may be used for increased efficiency if minimal terrain impact is anticipated. Vehicle travel through 
native prairie and riparian areas will be restricted to one pass along the right-of-way where practical. 

3. In areas where soil testing with a truck mounted auger is required, these activities will only take place 
under dry or frozen ground conditions so that surface disturbance is minimized. 

4. Site-specific features of concern (e.g., rare plant communities or heritage resource sites) identified 
during biophysical surveys will be flagged sufficiently (if approved by landowner and occupant) so 
that subsequent traffic can avoid these areas. 

5. All preconstruction vehicle traffic will use existing vehicle crossings (e.g., existing bridge) to cross 
flowing watercourses. Fording of flowing streams by vehicles will not be permitted. 

6. Preconstruction vehicle traffic will be limited to ATV traffic and, in severe cases, suspended if 
excessively wet soil conditions and the potential for topsoil/subsoil mixing due to rutting exists. Traffic 
will be confined to well sodded, well drained or frozen lands during excessively wet soil conditions. 

7. During right-of-way staking prior to commencement of construction activities, features of concern 
flagged during biophysical surveys and/or indicated on the Environmental Alignment Sheets will be 
staked or fenced so that areas to be avoided are obvious. 

1.2 Construction 

1. All project personnel and other visitors to the pipeline right-of-way will receive a pre-job orientation 
which will include a discussion of the purpose and requirements of the Traffic Control Plan. 

2. Access points to the right-of-way will be controlled, where necessary, to prohibit unauthorized public 
use.  

3. All vehicular traffic will be restricted to the approved and staked right-of-way, workspace and access 
roads. Any newly developed access must be approved by Enbridge. 

4. Fences and signs will be erected to protect features of concern as specified on the Environmental 
Alignment Sheets. The boundaries of shoo-flies will be clearly marked with signs and/or staking and 
flagging. 

5. Enbridge, the Contractor and all subcontractor personnel will avoid areas that are fenced or staked 
and abide by any restrictions on in/out privileges that are implemented in areas requiring special 
protection. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 
 Page 6C-2  
 
 

6. Enbridge, the Contractor and all subcontractor personnel will limit travel up and down the right-of-
way during the course of the work. General touring trips on the right-of-way will be minimized. 

7. Two-way travel may be prohibited in areas where special restrictions are in effect (e.g., narrowing of 
workspace to limit impact on a feature of concern). 

8. It may be necessary to designate turn around areas for stringing trucks. These areas will only be 
used for that purpose and not used for general construction traffic.  

9. The speed limit on the right-of-way will be 40 km/h and may be lower under specific conditions such 
as areas of high erosion hazard, or areas where specific wildlife or vegetation concerns have been 
identified. 

10. All personnel will avoid unnecessary wheel spin. 

11. Surface grading will be minimized on native vegetation (i.e., rough microtopography tolerated) unless 
a safety concern is identified.  

12. Equipment travel, particularly that of heavy and/or tracked equipment, will make use of the stripped 
areas over the trench line and graded areas for travel and passing whenever practical prior to 
trenching. 

1.3 Post-Construction 

1. All temporary construction access roads and shoo-flies will be reclaimed to preconstruction 
conditions. Newly created access points will be blocked unless otherwise directed by Enbridge or the 
landowner and occupant.  

2. Vehicle traffic will be minimized on newly seeded areas until the sod is re-established.  

3. Temporary construction gates and any fences removed during construction will be replaced with 
permanent fences.  

4. Routine access to the right-of-way for operations, maintenance and monitoring activities will be by 
way of pre-existing roads and trails wherever practical. Where travel along the right-of-way in the 
vicinity of sensitive vegetation is required (e.g., during reclamation monitoring), ATV or foot travel will 
be used whenever practical. 

5. Efforts to control off-road vehicle use will be coordinated with government authorities and 
landowners and will be conducted until the right-of-way has been satisfactorily reclaimed. Methods to 
control access may include one or a combination of the following: 

• posting of appropriate signs at all points of access; 

• installation of locking gates and fencing; and 

• installation of slash or rock barriers. 

6. Enbridge's emergency response measures will include instructions regarding preferred access 
routes to the right-of-way in areas of sensitive vegetation or habitats. These instructions will be 
followed during both emergency response training exercises and real emergencies providing that 
response times and safety are not compromised. 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 
   
 
 

 

 

 

 

APPENDIX 6D 
 

EMERGENCY CONTACTS 
 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 
 Page 6D-1  
 
 

TABLE 6D-1 
 

ALBERTA EMERGENCY CONTACTS 

Contact Location Phone Number 

RCMP Hardisty Provost 
911 

911 or (780) 753-2214 

Ambulance Hardisty Provost 
911 
911 

Hospital Hardisty Provost 
(780) 888-3742 
(780) 753-2291 

Fire 
Hardisty 

Hughenden 
Provost 

911 or (780) 888-3623 
911 or (780) 856-2022 
911 or (780) 753-2529 

National Energy Board Calgary 1-800-899-1265 

Fisheries and Oceans Canada Gabrielle Kosmider 
Edmonton 

(780) 495-8494 

Environment Canada  
(Canadian Wildlife Service) 

Paul Gregoire 
Edmonton 

(780) 951-8695 

Transport Canada 
(Navigable Waters) 

Allan Cadenhead 
Edmonton 

(780) 495-7892 

Alberta Sustainable Resource Development 
(ASRD) 

(Wildlife Contact) 

David Moore 
Vermilion 

(780) 853-8137 

ASRD 
(Fisheries Contact) 

Vance Buchwald or 
Kevin Wingert 

Red Deer 

(403) 340-5356 or 
(403) 340-7685 

ASRD 
(Public Lands Officer) 

Patrick Porter 
Wainwright 

(780) 842-7551 

Alberta Tourism, Parks, Recreation and 
Culture  

(Heritage Resources Contact) 

George Chalut 
Edmonton 

(780) 431-2329 

Alberta Disaster Services Edmonton (780) 427-2772 

Alberta Energy and Utilities Board - Field 
Centre 

Wainwright (780) 842-7570 
(toll free at 310-000) 

AENV Compliance Branch Edmonton (780) 422-4505 

AENV Emergency / Complaint Hotline 
(24 hours) 

Alberta 1-800-222-6514 (24 hr)  
or 7378 (Telus mobile) 

Area "U" Oil Spill Co-operative Chairman Alberta (780) 888-8352 
(780) 888-2397 (fax) 

Forest Fire Alberta 310-3473 

Emergency Link Centre 
S.T.A.R.S. Air Rescue 

Alberta 1-888-888-4567 
or *4567 (cell phone) 

 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 
 Page 6D-2  
 
 

TABLE 6D-2 
 

SASKATCHEWAN EMERGENCY CONTACTS 

Contact Location Phone Number 

RCMP 

Macklin 
Luseland 
Kerrobert 
Kindersley 
Rosetown 
Outlook 
Elbow 

Central Butte 
Craik 

Moose Jaw 
Regina 

Montmartre 
Kipling 

911 or (306) 228-6300 
911 or (306) 372-4844 
911 or (306) 834-6550 
911 or (306) 463-4642 
911 or (306) 882-5700 
911 or (306) 867-5440 
911 or (306) 854-1830 

911 
(306) 734-2288 

911 or (306) 691-9670 
911 or (306) 780-5560 
911 or (306) 424-6400 
911 or (306) 736-6400 

Ambulance 

Macklin 
Luseland 
Kerrobert 
Kindersley 
Rosetown 
Outlook 
Elbow 

Central Butte 
Craik 

Moose Jaw 
Regina 

Montmartre 
Kipling 

911 
911 
911 
911 
911 
911 
911 
911 

(306) 567-2115 (Davidson) 
911 

911 or (306) 525-3999 
911 
911 

Hospital 

Macklin 
Kerrobert 
Kindersley 
Rosetown 
Outlook 

Central Butte 
Craik 

Moose Jaw 
Regina 
Kipling 

(306) 753-2366 
(306) 834-2646 
(306) 463-2611 
(306) 882-2672 

911 or (306) 867-8676 
(306) 796-2190 
(306) 734-2288 
(306) 694-0200 
(306) 766-4444 
(306) 736-2553 

Fire 

Macklin 
Kerrobert 
Kindersley 
Rosetown 
Outlook 

Central Butte 
Craik 

Moose Jaw 
Regina 
Kipling 

911 
911 or (306) 834-5330 
911 or (306) 463-4234 
911 or (306) 882-2513 

911 
911 or (306) 796-2288 

911 
911 or (306) 692-2794 
911 or (306) 777-7846 

911 
National Energy Board Calgary 1-800-899-1265 

Fisheries and Oceans Canada Bruce Howard 
Regina 

(306) 780-8724 

Environment Canada 
(Canadian Wildlife Service) 

Girma Sahlu 
Regina 

(306) 780-6425 

Transport Canada 
(Navigable Waters) 

Allan Cadenhead 
Edmonton 

(780) 495-7892 

Mariposa Prairie Farm 
Rehabilitation Administration  

(PFRA) 

Mark Sayers 
(KP 347.3 to KP 348.8) 

(306) 834-2853 

 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 
 Page 6D-3  
 
 

TABLE 6D-2  Cont'd 

Contact Location Phone Number 
Progress PFRA Joe Coleman 

(KP 324.5 to KP 331.3) 
(306) 834-5161 

Elbow PFRA Ross Sigfusson 
(KP 560.4 to KP 566.4) 

(306) 567-4709 

SENV 
(Oil and Gas Coordinator) 

Lorne Sullivan 
Saskatoon 

(KP 275.0 to KP 289.8 and  
KP 388.4 to KP 431.6) 

Maureen Sigmeth 
Swift Current 

(KP 289.8 to KP 388.4 and  
KP 431.6 to KPR 35.6) 

Glen Metivier 
Saskatoon (responsible for Melville) 

(KPR 35.6 to KP 945.0) 

(306) 933-6532 
 
 
 

(306) 778-8261 
 
 
 

(306) 933-5026 

SENV 
(Wildlife Contact) 

John Pogorzelec 
Swift Current 

(KP 275.0 to KP 729.8) 
Adam Schmidt 

Melville (also responsible for 
Saskatoon) 

(KP 729.8 to KP 945.0) 

(306) 778-8522 
 
 

(306) 728-7487 

SENV 
(Fisheries Contact) 

Jennifer Merkowsky  
Saskatoon (also responsible for Swift 

Current) 
(KP 275.0 to KP 587.4) 

Al McCutcheon 
Melville 

(KP 587.4 to KP 945.0) 

(306) 933-7943 
 
 
 

(306) 728-7491 

Saskatchewan Culture, Youth and 
Recreation (Heritage Resources 

Contact) 

Carlos Germann 
Regina 

(306) 787-5772 

SWA Bryan Ireland 
Moose Jaw 

(306) 694-3950 

Saskatchewan Emergency 
Management Organization 

Regina (306) 787-9563 

Saskatchewan Environment - 
Compliance and Field Services 

Branch - Southern Field Services 

Regina (306) 787-1475 

Area "2" Oil Spill Co-operative 
Chairman 

Dallas Morrell (780) 871-8737 or  
(306) 821-6879 (Cell) 

Area "3" Oil Spill Co-operative 
Chairman 

Gilbert Cadrain 
 

Gary Hammer 

(306) 778-0234 or  
(306) 741-8922 (Cell) 

(306) 773-9381 or  
(306) 741-7551 (Cell) 

Areas "4" and "5" Oil Spill Co-
operative Chairman 

Laurel Mohl 
Jon Hutt 

(306) 456-4119 
(306) 842-3088 or  

(306) 861-2220 (Cell) 
Area "6" Oil Spill Co-operative 

Chairman 
Scott Terlson 

Richard Thiele 
(306) 777-9696 
(306) 949-0555 

Spill Emergency Saskatchewan 1-800-667-7525 
 (24 hours) 

Forest Fire Saskatchewan 1-800-667-9660 
Saskatchewan Air Ambulance 

Service 
Saskatchewan 1-888-782-8247 

 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 
 Page 6D-4  
 
 

TABLE 6D-3 
 

MANITOBA EMERGENCY CONTACTS 

Contact Location Phone Number 

RCMP 

Virden 
Brandon 
Souris 

Wawanesa 
Glenboro 
Somerset 
Morden 
Winkler 
Altona 
Gretna 

(204) 748-2046 
911 or (204) 729-2345 

(204) 483-2854 
(204) 483-2854 

(204) 834-2131 (Carberry)
(204) 822-4900 
(204) 822-4900 

911 or (204) 325-9990 
(204) 324-5217 
(204) 324-5217 

Ambulance 

Virden 
Brandon 
Souris 

Wawanesa 
Glenboro 
Somerset 
Morden 
Winkler 
Altona 
Gretna 

(204) 748-3642 
911 
911 
911 
911 

(204) 836-2132 (Swan Lake)
911 
911 

(204) 324-7373 
(204) 324-7373 

Hospital 

Virden 
Brandon 
Souris 

Wawanesa 
Glenboro 
Somerset 
Morden 
Winkler 
Altona 
Gretna 

(204) 748-1230 
(204) 578-4000 
(204) 483-2121 
(204) 824-2335 
(204) 827-2438 

(204) 836-2132 (Swan Lake)
(204) 331-8808 
(204) 331-8808 
(204) 324-6411 
(204) 324-6411 

Fire 

Virden 
Brandon 
Souris 

Wawanesa 
Glenboro 
Somerset 
Morden 
Winkler 
Altona 
Gretna 

(204) 748-1304 
911 or (204) 729-2400 

911 
911 
911 
911 
911 

911 or (204) 325-8151 
911 
911 

National Energy Board Calgary 1-800-899-1265 

Fisheries and Oceans Canada Keith Kristofferson 
Winnipeg 

(204) 984-8891 

Environment Canada 
(Canadian Wildlife Service) 

Mike Norton 
Edmonton 

(780) 951-8687 

Transport Canada 
(Navigable Waters) 

Allan Cadenhead 
Edmonton 

(780) 495-7892 

Manitoba Conservation 
(Wildlife contact) 

Dan Chranowski (western) 
Brandon 

Gene Collins (interlake) 
Gimli 

(204) 726-6450 
 

(204) 642-6077 

 



Enbridge Pipelines Inc.  Alberta Clipper Project 
  Volume II 
 

 
April 2007  4462 
 Page 6D-5  
 
 

TABLE 6D-3  Cont'd 

Contact Location Phone Number 
Manitoba Water Stewardship 

(Fisheries Contact) 
Bruno Bruederlin 

Brandon 
(204) 726-6452 

Manitoba Culture, Heritage and 
Tourism 

(Heritage Resources Contact) 

Gord Hill 
Winnipeg 

(204) 945-7730 

Manitoba Emergency Measures 
Organization 

Winnipeg (204) 945-5555 
(24 Hour Emergency Line) 

Manitoba Science, Technology, 
Energy and Mines - Petroleum 

Contacts, Field Operations 

Townships North of Twp. 6 - Virden 
Office 

(KP 960 to KP 1104) 
 

Twp. 1 to 6 -  
Waskada Office 

(KP 1104 to KP 1242) 

(204) 748-4260 
 
 
 

(204) 673-2472 

Manitoba Producers Oil Spill Co-
operative Chairman 

Jim Hay (204) 748-3095 

Manitoba Conservation - Spill 
Report 

Manitoba (204) 944-4888 

Forest Fire  1-800-782-0076 

Lifeflight Air Ambulance Manitoba 
(Winnipeg) 

911 

 

 


	6.0 ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC EFFECTS ASSESSMENT
	6.1 Methodology
	6.2 Effects Assessment - Pipeline and Associated Pipeline Facilities Construction and Operation 
	6.3 Effects Assessment - Pump Additions
	6.4 Effects Assessment - Hardisty Terminal Tank Installation
	6.5 Effects Assessment - Temporary Facilities for Construction
	6.6 Effects Assessment - Decommissioning and Abandonment
	6.7 Effects of the Environment on the Project
	6.8 Summary of Environmental and Socio-Economic Effects Assessment
	6.9 References
	TABLE 6.1 EVALUATION OF THE SIGNIFICANCE OF RESIDUAL EFFECTS - ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC ASSESSMENT CRITERIA1
	TABLE 6.2 POTENTIAL BIOPHYSICAL AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC EFFECTS, MITIGATIVE MEASURESAND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF ALBERTA CLIPPER PIPELINE CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION
	TABLE 6.3WATERCOURSE CROSSING SUMMARY FOR THE ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT
	TABLE 6.4 TIMING CONSTRAINTS AND SETBACKS FOR SENSITIVE WILDLIFE RECOMMENDED BY FEDERAL AND PROVINCIAL AGENCIES
	TABLE 6.5 LOCATIONS OF EXTENSIVE TRACTS OF NATIVE VEGETATION, LARGE WATERCOURSES AND OPEN WATER ALONG THE PROPOSED PIPELINE ROUTE
	TABLE 6.6 SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF ADVERSE RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF IDENTIFIED BIOPHYSICAL AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC ELEMENTS OF THE PROPOSED PIPELINE
	TABLE 6.7 ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF THE ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT
	TABLE 6.8 ELEMENTS NOT INTERACTING WITH PUMP ADDITIONS COMPONENTOF THE ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT
	TABLE 6.9 POTENTIAL BIOPHYSICAL AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC EFFECTS, MITIGATIVE MEASURESAND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF PUMP ADDITIONS
	Detail 6.1 Rowatt Pump Station Vegetation Screen
	TABLE 6.10 SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF ADVERSE RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF IDENTIFIED BIOPHYSICAL AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC ELEMENTS OF PUMP ADDITIONS
	TABLE 6.11 ELEMENTS NOT INTERACTING WITH THE HARDISTY TERMINAL TANK INSTALLATION COMPONENT OF THE ALBERTA CLIPPER PROJECT
	TABLE 6.12 POTENTIAL BIOPHYSICAL AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC EFFECTS, MITIGATIVE MEASURESAND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF TANK INSTALLATION AND OPERATION AT HARDISTY TERMINAL
	Detail 6.2 Hardisty Terminal Tank Expansion Vegetation Screen
	TABLE 6.13 SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF ADVERSE RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF IDENTIFIED BIOPHYSICAL AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC ELEMENTS OF TANK INSTALLATION AT HARDISTY TERMINAL

	Vol II - ESA - Section 6 - Effects Assessment (Part2).pdf
	6.0 ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC EFFECTS ASSESSMENT
	APPENDIX 6A PIPELINE CONSTRUCTION AND RECLAMATION PLAN
	APPENDIX 6B CONTINGENCY PLANS
	APPENDIX 6C TRAFFIC CONTROL PLAN
	APPENDIX 6D EMERGENCY CONTACTS
	TABLE 6D-1 ALBERTA EMERGENCY CONTACTS
	TABLE 6D-2 SASKATCHEWAN EMERGENCY CONTACTS
	TABLE 6D-3 MANITOBA EMERGENCY CONTACTS





