
















































Prepared for:


SemCAMS Redwillow ULC  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Redwillow Pipeline Project December 2007 / 5149 
 

 
   

Page 8-1 
 
 

8.0 INSPECTION, MONITORING AND FOLLOW-UP 
This section describes the practices and programs SemCAMS has developed to ensure that the 
recommended protection measures and commitments made in the ESA are implemented throughout the 
construction and operation phases of the Project so that ecological integrity of the current environment 
affected by the Project is maintained and, where practical, enhanced. Information contained within this 
section addresses Guide A.2.7 Inspection, Monitoring and Follow-up of the NEB Filing Manual (2004). 

8.1 Environmental Policy 

A copy of the SemCAMS Health, Environmental and Safety (HES) Policy applicable to the Project is 
provided. This policy includes a commitment to: 

“excellence in managing all of the health, environmental and safety aspects of our 
business and of the facilities that SemCAMS operates." 

and applies to all phases of SemCAMS’ work to serve as a guide for a healthy, environmentally 
responsible and safe work place. SemCAMS is committed to implementing the key principles contained in 
the HES Policy for the Project. It is applicable to SemCAMS Redwillow ULC as well as to all activities of 
SemCAMS' Affiliates. 

Along with SemCAMS’ commitment to the implementation of the HES Policy, SemCAMS has agreed to 
follow the mitigative measures presented in Sections 6.2, 6.3 and 6.5 of the ESA to minimize the risk of 
adverse environmental effects associated with the Project and to maintain, restore or enhance ecological 
integrity of the environment in the vicinity of the Project. In addition, SemCAMS has agreed to use the 
EPP (see Appendix 6A), which will be further developed for the Project and used as a guide for the 
construction of the Project. 

8.2 Environmental Education During Construction 

A draft environmental education program is outlined in Sections 8.2.1 through 8.2.4. This program is 
designed to ensure that all individuals involved in the construction of the Project understand the 
environmental requirements and their role and responsibilities with regard to meeting those requirements. 
The environmental education program, in association with safety training, will be provided to all 
construction personnel and visitors, and will consist of a variety of levels of environmental awareness and 
training. Construction personnel for the Project will include nonsupervisory and supervisory workers, as 
well as SemCAMS’ Construction Supervisor, Environmental Inspectors and Activity Inspectors. 
Individuals will receive training commensurate with their roles and responsibilities. In addition to the 
standard, formal training provided in advance of construction, issue-specific or site-specific training, or 
refresher training will also be conducted as warranted. Records of environmental training provided to 
workers and visitors will be maintained. The proposed training programs are described below. 

8.2.1 Basic Level - Nonsupervisory Construction Personnel and Visitors 

Since all individuals, including visitors, have the potential to influence compliance with environmental 
commitments and contribute to maintaining ecological and commemorative integrity and to the principles 
of environmental stewardship, SemCAMS will devise a standardized means of imparting critical 
information regarding the environmental requirements of the Project to all workers and visitors. An 
Environmental Handbook will be produced and used for the basic level of environmental training. The 
handbook will be a concise pamphlet and will contain an overview of environmental issues and mitigation 
as well as the main “do’s and don’ts” for the nondecision-making worker and visitor. Means of how 
individual's actions can contribute to ecological integrity and environmental stewardship will be discussed 
(e.g., putting garbage in refuse containers, bear awareness and training) as will expectations of worker 
conduct. Copies of the handbook will be available onsite at the construction field office so that it can be 
given to visitors, upon their arrival, or to new hires on their first day of work. Upon completion of the basic 
level of training, the individual will be required to sign a form indicating that they have read and 
understood the handbook and will be issued a hardhat sticker signifying that they have completed the 
basic training. No person will be permitted to be on the Project site without a valid hardhat sticker. 



SemCAMS Redwillow ULC  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Redwillow Pipeline Project December 2007 / 5149 
 

 
   

Page 8-2 

 
 

 

 

 
 



SemCAMS Redwillow ULC  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Redwillow Pipeline Project December 2007 / 5149 
 

 
   

Page 8-3 
 
 

8.2.2 Intermediate Level – Supervisory Construction Personnel and Inspectors 

In addition to basic level training, supervisory construction personnel and SemCAMS-employed 
inspectors (i.e., the decision-makers during the construction of the Project) will be required to complete a 
more comprehensive environmental training session prior to working on the Project. This intermediate 
level of environmental training will be provided through a classroom session conducted by SemCAMS’ 
environmental staff or their designated representative. The curriculum for the intermediate level training 
will consist of a presentation and discussion of the following: 

• SemCAMS’ HES Policy; 

• environmental issues and mitigative measures, and how to interpret the EPP and associated 
Environmental Alignment Sheets and details, 

• contingency plans; 

• decision-making procedures regarding environmental matters; and 

• the role and responsibilities of the Environmental Inspector. 

8.2.3 Advanced Level – Construction Supervisors and Environmental Inspectors 

SemCAMS’ environmental staff, or their designated representative, will conduct an advanced level 
environmental training program for the Construction Supervisors and Environmental Inspectors in order to 
prepare them for the specialized capacity in which they will be working. The advanced level of 
environmental training will consist of a review of Project documents and a classroom session. The 
advanced level environmental training curriculum will address the following: 

• authority of Construction Supervisor and Environmental Inspector; 

• SemCAMS’ HES Policy and environmental compliance initiatives; 

• environmental issues and mitigative measures; 

• environmental issue resolution and the role of the Environmental Inspector as it relates to other 
supervisory / inspection personnel; 

• contingency plans and the role of the Construction Supervisor and Environmental Inspector in the 
event of emergencies such as fires or spills; 

• regulatory permits and approvals and other environmental commitments; 

• regulatory liaison and associated requirements; 

• stakeholder relations; 

• site-specific and refresher training; and 

• daily duties, reporting requirements and general procedural protocols. 

The Construction Supervisors and Environmental Inspectors will be provided with copies of the ESA, 
EPP, Environmental Alignment Sheets, all permits and approvals obtained for the Project and other 
appropriate reference material (e.g., water quality monitoring protocol). A library of applicable 
environmental Project documents and other reference material (e.g., CCME documents for contaminated 
sites) will also be maintained in the Project field offices for use by Environmental Inspectors and other 
construction inspection/supervisory personnel. 

In addition, specialized training for Environmental Inspectors will be provided. This will consist of 
information sessions provided by Project resource specialists (e.g., botanists and foresters, wildlife 



SemCAMS Redwillow ULC  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Redwillow Pipeline Project December 2007 / 5149 
 

 
   

Page 8-4 
 
 

biologists, archaeologists) to develop or improve skills (e.g., conducting an initial assessment of a 
suspected archaeological find during strippings salvage or trenching, identification of MPB and other 
forest health pathogens, etc.). By so doing, Environmental Inspectors will be better equipped to 
implement contingency plans to be contained within the EPP such as the Heritage Resource Discovery 
Contingency Plan. The Project resource specialists will be on call to assist the Environmental Inspectors 
as required. 

8.2.4 Site-Specific Training and Refresher Training 

Site-specific or issue-specific training provides an opportunity for on-the-spot reinforcement of awareness 
of environmental stewardship, special measures pertaining to sensitive areas or to activities with a high 
potential for adverse environmental impacts. Environmental Inspectors and other inspection/supervisory 
personnel will conduct this type of training whenever it is deemed to be necessary such as prior to 
instream work at sensitive watercourses. The overall plan of action including timing and responsibilities 
will be discussed. Special emphasis will be given to unusual issues or measures to be implemented. 
Contingency plans and the location of resources to deal with contingency events may also be reviewed at 
that time, if appropriate. Impromptu, informal training will also be undertaken where individuals or crews 
would benefit from refresher training. 

8.3 Environmental Inspection 

The Environmental Inspectors will monitor construction and prepare daily reports of activities and 
conditions. The environmental issues and the implementation of mitigative measures will be carefully 
monitored by the Environmental Inspector. If the mitigative measures are not found to be effective, the 
Environmental Inspector will consult with one or more of the following as required and as appropriate: 
Construction Supervisor; SemCAMS’ staff and/or government representatives. The Environmental 
Inspectors will also be responsible for enforcing compliance with environmental commitments, approvals 
and permits, recommending additional or alternative mitigative measures, noting potentially adverse 
environmental effects, identifying site-specific issues, and determining the status of environmental issues 
following construction of the Project. Section 8.3.2 outlines a more detailed list of the roles and 
responsibilities of the Environmental Inspectors. 

8.3.1 Environmental Inspection Program Description 

The involvement in the Project of full-time, highly qualified and well-trained Environmental Inspectors is a 
key component of SemCAMS’ environmental compliance strategy. The Environmental Inspectors will 
enforce continuous and consistent compliance with the ESA, EPP, all permit conditions, environmental 
laws and guidelines, and other environmental commitments. SemCAMS’ staff will be available to the 
Environmental Inspectors for decision-making support and resolution of environmental resource issues 
arising onsite. 

The Environmental Inspectors will report directly to SemCAMS’ Construction Supervisor and indirectly to 
SemCAMS’ Environmental staff or a designated representative. They will be recognized as an integral 
part of the construction management team. Their role will be well defined within the chain of command. 
The Environmental Inspectors will have crew shut-down authority for environmental reasons. A 
responsibility of the Environmental Inspectors will be to make recommendations to the Construction 
Supervisor with regard to environmental shut down (e.g., wet conditions shut-down). 

8.3.2 Environmental Inspector Qualifications and Duties 

The Environmental Inspectors will have in depth knowledge of pipeline construction techniques and will 
take a preventative approach rather than a reactive approach to environmental issues. In addition, 
preference will be given to candidates with a post-secondary education in the natural sciences or other 
pertinent training. The Environmental Inspectors must have a demonstrated positive attitude toward 
environmental protection and a track record of successful environmental issue resolution resulting in 
satisfactory resource protection. In addition, the Environmental Inspectors will be supported by 
appropriate Resource Specialists who will be available onsite, when warranted, and have expertise in the 



SemCAMS Redwillow ULC  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Redwillow Pipeline Project December 2007 / 5149 
 

 
   

Page 8-5 
 
 

particular issues associated with the spread (i.e., soil scientist, geotechnical engineer, wetland specialist, 
Registered Professional Forester, fisheries biologist, botanist, wildlife biologist, archaeologist, reclamation 
specialist, etc.). 

In general, the Environmental Inspectors will be responsible for: 

• ensuring familiarity with all Project related environmental documents and decisions and commitments 
relating to those documents; 

• delivering basic level environmental training sessions; 

• ensuring that work proceeds in compliance with all environmental commitments contained within the 
ESA, conditions of the NEB Certificate, other permits and approvals, as well as other environmental 
laws, regulations and guidelines that apply to the Project; 

• working directly with other activity inspectors and contractor supervisory staff to assist in the 
interpretation and implementation of environmental mitigation and reclamation measures; 

• monitoring of activities that could result in potentially adverse environmental effects and overseeing 
the implementation of mitigative measures specifically intended to minimize those effects; 

• proactively identifying new environmental issues that may arise and recommending suitable 
mitigation; 

• assessing the effectiveness of mitigative measures and recommending alternative measures, in 
consultation with SemCAMS’ Environmental Coordinator and, where warranted, with government 
agencies such as DFO to achieve the desired result; 

• providing advice and recommendations for major decisions, such as courses of action to deal with 
unexpected environmental conditions, including requiring work stoppage; 

• suspending operations where unacceptable situations with serious environmental implications arise 
(e.g., where fish or fish habitat may be at risk, where plant species of special status or bird nests are 
encountered or where there is substantial siltation of a watercourse or erosion of soils); 

• implementing and ensuring compliance with contingency plans, as required; 

• reporting any spills in accordance with federal and/or provincial regulations and providing advice with 
regard to the clean-up and disposal of the material and any affected soils or vegetation; 

• coordination and facilitation of any water, soil and biological monitoring or sampling, if required; 

• maintaining and documenting liaison with government agencies, as stipulated in permit conditions, as 
well as responding to any noncompliance issues raised by the agencies; 

• participating in ongoing liaison with other stakeholders when warranted; 

• preparing daily reports and keeping other records (e.g., photographic record) with regard to project 
activities; 

• tracking environmental issues, including noncompliance issues; and 

• preparing the Environmental As-Built Report. 

8.3.3 Communication and Reporting 

The Environmental Inspectors will report directly to SemCAMS’ Construction Supervisor in matters 
relating to environmental construction and reclamation requirements. Environmental issues and 
noncompliances, the reasons for the noncompliance, and the measures undertaken for the resolution of 



SemCAMS Redwillow ULC  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Redwillow Pipeline Project December 2007 / 5149 
 

 
   

Page 8-6 
 
 

each issue and noncompliance will be recorded and tracked in daily reports. Serious noncompliances will 
be immediately reported to SemCAMS. If issues remain unresolved following the implementation of 
remedial measures, the issue and location(s) in question and measures proposed to resolve the issue will 
be recorded in an Environmental As-Built Report. The Environmental As-Built Report will form the basis of 
an overall Post-Construction Environmental Report. The Post-Construction Environmental Report will be 
submitted by SemCAMS to the NEB within six months of the date that the Redwillow Project is put into 
service, unless otherwise directed by the NEB, and will be the foundation of the PCMP (Section 8.5 of the 
ESA). 

8.3.4 Environmental As-Built Report 

Following completion of construction, Environmental Inspectors will assist in the preparation of an 
Environmental As-Built Report making use of daily reports, photos and records of government liaison. 
The Environmental As-Built Report will be submitted to SemCAMS and will form the basis of an overall 
Post-Construction Environmental Report as discussed below. 

The Environmental As-Built Report for each spread will contain the following: 

• a Project description including what portion of the work was conducted, the construction kick-off and 
completion dates, and the names of the activity inspectors and other key construction supervisory 
personnel with whom the Environmental Inspector had regular interactions; 

• the general procedures, equipment used and mitigation measures implemented for each activity for 
which environmental inspection was required; 

• the procedures that were implemented in the case of any unforeseen environmental issues that 
arose, as well as a discussion of the decision making process involved in arriving at those 
procedures; 

• a detailed record of any discussions and decisions made regarding conflicting permit requirements or 
requests from government agencies; 

• a description of problems encountered (e.g., equipment breakdown) that may have been detrimental 
to the efforts to implement mitigative measures and a discussion of any measures taken to alleviate 
or counteract those problems; 

• a detailed record of any instances where recommendations (e.g., use of a specific type of seeding 
equipment) could not be implemented and the circumstances and location of the event as well as the 
decision-making rationale; 

• a discussion of specific mitigation techniques and any field adaptations that were used to make the 
mitigation more effective; 

• a record of government and stakeholder liaison; 

• a photo record; 

• selected Environmental Alignment Sheets with hand-written notes pertinent to the Environmental As-
Built Report such as areas where extra temporary workspace was taken, sites where a spot spill 
occurred, where erosion and/or sediment control measures were installed, location of heritage 
resources or wildlife or plant species at risk discovered during construction, etc.; 

• a list of environmental issues and their respective status (i.e., resolved and unresolved); and 

• in the case of unresolved issues, the steps SemCAMS proposes to take to resolve those issues. 

Any pertinent paperwork such as memos and permit revisions will appear as an appendix to the 
Environmental As-Built Report. 



SemCAMS Redwillow ULC  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Redwillow Pipeline Project December 2007 / 5149 
 

 
   

Page 8-7 
 
 

8.4 Issue Monitoring During Construction 

SemCAMS will strive to carry out the Project in an environmentally responsible manner through the 
assessment of environmental issues, the planning and implementation of mitigative measures as well as 
contingency plans to address those issues, and the establishment of compliance initiatives such as 
environmental education and environmental inspection. 

In the event that an unforeseen environmental issue arises during construction for which no mitigative 
measures have been approved, SemCAMS’ Environmental Coordinator and the Environmental Inspector 
will formulate a plan of action in consultation with the appropriate government agencies. Representatives 
of the NEB (and others government agencies where appropriate) will be invited to participate. The plan of 
action will include measures to both assess and mitigate the environmental impact. 

No substantial changes to the mitigative measures as they appear in the ESA, EPP, on the 
Environmental Alignment Sheets or regulatory permits will be made without the approval of the NEB and 
other appropriate government authorities having jurisdiction. 

If the requirements of permits or the direction given by regulators are found to be conflicting, an attempt 
will be made to resolve the discrepancy or disagreement with available representatives of affected 
government agencies. The Environmental Inspector will participate in the discussions and record the 
outcome in the Environmental As-Built Report. 

8.5 Post-Construction Monitoring Program 

The PCMP will include an assessment of reclamation, revegetation, erosion control and any weed 
problem areas. Reclamation monitoring involves an assessment of the final clean-up along the right-of-
way, which includes: grade restoration; strippings replacement; seeding; drainage restoration; debris 
removal; trench settlement; and slope stability. Revegetation monitoring involves an assessment of the 
re-establishment of vegetation and success of revegetation as well as the identification of any weed 
infestations along the right-of-way. Erosion monitoring involves an assessment of the effect of wind and 
water along the right-of-way as well as the assessment of effectiveness of any erosion control measures 
implemented during construction. 

SemCAMS will commission PCMPs to be conducted during the first and second complete growing 
seasons following construction. By initiating these programs in years one and two, issues identified and 
remedial actions taken during the first year can be assessed and any residual outstanding issues can be 
dealt with during the next year. Filing of these PCM reports with the NEB enables documentation of the 
corrective actions and helps tighten overall project timelines. Outstanding right-of-way issues arising after 
the first two years of construction will be identified through SemCAMS’ continuous monitoring of all 
aspects of right-of-way integrity and addressed as warranted. 

The purpose of the PCMP will be to: 

• evaluate the recovery of the areas disturbed during pipeline construction; 

• assess the status of outstanding environmental issues identified in the Environmental As-Built Report 
(Section 8.3.4 of the ESA); 

• identify any new environmental issues that may have arisen; and 

• recommend and coordinate the implementation of any remedial measures that are warranted and 
additional special measures to address outstanding or new environmental issues. 

8.5.1 Reclamation Specialist 

Site inspections will be conducted by a qualified reclamation specialist. If necessary, additional expertise 
will be sought to assess other issues that may arise (e.g., wildlife issues). The appropriate specialists will 
recommend and oversee the implementation of any remedial measures and conduct follow-up site 
inspections. 



SemCAMS Redwillow ULC  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Redwillow Pipeline Project December 2007 / 5149 
 

 
   

Page 8-8 
 
 

8.5.2 Government Agency Consultation 

SemCAMS and/or their representatives will initiate a post-construction dialogue with each applicable 
government agency (e.g., ASRD, BC MOFR) along the route during the first and second growing seasons 
after construction to discuss reclamation progress to date and to address and/or resolve any reclamation 
problems noted by the government agency. 

8.5.3 Post-Construction Soils Assessment 

During the first growing season after construction, soil sampling will be conducted, if warranted, at sites 
identified in the Environmental As-Built Report as having issues and where reclamation problems are 
identified through operation and maintenance reports or aerial and ground reconnaissance. Observations 
and measurements to assess reclamation success will be collected and documented. 

The number of, and distance between, sampling locations along the right-of-way will be determined by 
the Reclamation Soil Specialist conducting the sampling. It is anticipated that sampling will be more 
frequent in complex landscapes and less frequent in homogeneous landscapes. Criteria will include, but 
not be limited to, the following: 

• visual indications of potential issues; 

• landscape variation; 

• changes in construction procedures; 

• changes in vegetation species composition; and 

• changes in soil moisture. 

When issues are identified through this assessment, every effort will be made to implement mitigative 
measures as soon as feasible following their initial identification. Issues that cannot be mitigated 
immediately (e.g., subsoil compaction may be identified but soils may be too wet for effective subsoil 
plowing to be implemented) will be documented in an Environmental Issues Tracking List for mitigation 
and follow-up monitoring in year two or as soon as conditions allow. 

8.5.4 Vegetation Monitoring 

The right-of-way will be visually inspected by a reclamation specialist during the first growing season 
following construction for vegetation issues such as weed infestations or poor vegetation establishment. 
Timing will be in the late summer/early fall when vegetation is mature enough for accurate identification 
and evaluation. Particular attention will be given to areas of terrain instability that may be prone to 
erosion. Detailed vegetation assessments will be conducted, if warranted, at sites where reclamation 
problems are identified. The above process will be continued during the second year after construction 
assessment. 

8.5.5 Operation and Maintenance Activities 

After the first spring and summer following construction, SemCAMS’ Operation and Maintenance 
personnel will monitor the right-of-way as needed to ensure any issues related to trench subsidence, 
slope or bank erosion or wind and water erosion of soil are identified early and mitigative measures 
implemented in a timely basis. Following the second year after construction, routine monitoring by 
SemCAMS personnel will be continuous for the life of the pipeline. 

8.5.6 Documentation and Reporting 

The PCMP will document, using the Environmental Issues Tracking List, all environmental issues 
identified for the Project. Issues that have been successfully mitigated will be listed as resolved. The 



SemCAMS Redwillow ULC  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Redwillow Pipeline Project December 2007 / 5149 
 

 
   

Page 8-9 
 
 

Environmental Issues Tracking List will also identify any locations with unresolved environmental issues, 
and the mitigation activities planned by SemCAMS to resolve these issues. 

8.5.7 Issue Tracking and Reporting 

The status of environmental issues addressed during the PCMP will be tracked through the use of an 
Environmental Issues Tracking List. This list or database will be updated on an ongoing basis. The 
Environmental Issues Tracking List will form the basis of a PCM report, which will be prepared at the end 
of the first-year and second year after construction. Issues that are completely resolved will be removed 
from the list of the following calendar year. 

8.6 Pipeline System Integrity 

SemCAMS operates their existing pipeline system in Alberta with great care and diligence. SemCAMS is 
committed to maintaining their pipeline rights-of-way and operating the pipelines and associated facilities 
with a continuing high standard of environmental excellence. These high standards of environmental 
excellence will be executed during the design, construction, operation and decommissioning and 
abandonment of the Redwillow Pipeline Project. 

8.6.1 CAMS Health, Environment and Safety System 

SemCAMS is committed to excellence in managing all of the health, environmental and safety aspects of 
its operation. To achieve this commitment, SemCAMS has developed CHESS. CHESS is comprised of 
12 elements including: 

• Corporate Commitment; 

• Compliance Assurance; 

• Health and Safety Management; 

• Environmental Management; 

• Audits and Inspections; 

• Incident Reporting and Investigation; 

• Emergency Preparedness and Response; 

• Contractor Management; 

• Operation Control; 

• Communication; 

• Employee Training; and 

• Policies and Standards. 

All SemCAMS employees are responsible for performing their work in a manner consistent with CHESS, 
as are all temporary employees, consultants and contractors. 



SemCAMS Redwillow ULC  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Redwillow Pipeline Project December 2007 / 5149 
 

 
   

Page 8-10 
 
 

Environmental Management 
Key goals of the Environmental Management element of CHESS include pollution prevention, energy and 
resource conservation and waste management. SemCAMS’ mission is to continuously reduce the 
environmental and health impacts of their facilities, operations, products and services. Optimization of 
SemCAMS’ practices and processes will promote the most efficient development, use and conservation 
or energy resources. SemCAMS’ commitment to this effort will lead to the long-term viability of their 
operation, a competitive advantage and a reputable corporate image in the community. 

The objectives of the Environmental Management element of CHESS include: 

• demonstrate clear commitment and leadership by management to achieve continuous improvements 
in the environment; 

• maintain a comprehensive inventory of environmental aspects associated with SemCAMS’ 
operational processes. Assure potential environmental risks associated with SemCAMS’ operations 
are identified and ranked as to the impact they could have on the environment; 

• conduct assessments of the potential impacts and environmental risks associated with waste and 
releases within the workplace and the community; 

• prioritize waste and releases for a reduction effort (setting objectives, and targets); if appropriate, 
identify and prioritize products targeted for pollution prevention efforts; 

• establish responsibilities and Environmental Management Programs to achieve environmental goals 
such as reducing waste and releases, flaring, GHGs, etc. Establish action plans for implementation, 
giving preference first to source reduction, second to recycling / reuse and third to treatment. These 
techniques may be used separately or in combination with one another;  

• measure and evaluate progress in pollution prevention efforts in bi-annual Management Reviews; 

• conduct an ongoing dialogue with employees, contractors and the public on all aspects associated 
with plant operation, impacts and risks of releases, plans for reduction and progress in achieving set 
goals; 

• promote pollution prevention activities with customers, suppliers, contractors and partners, evaluate 
their performance, and use pollution prevention criteria in determining future business with them; 

• maintain a process to evaluate, minimize and/or remediate environmental impacts caused by past 
operating practices; and 

• energy and resource conservation will be achieved through stakeholder awareness, establishment of 
programs to conduct periodic inventories on energy and fuel usage for all of SemCAMS’ assets and 
ongoing inspections to ensure their processes are efficient. 

Within the Environmental Management element of CHESS, there are 17 procedures described that are 
designed to ensure the environmental goals and objectives described above are met. Where applicable, 
these 17 procedures as well as the other 11 elements of CHESS will be updated and/or revised to include 
the construction, operation, decommissioning and abandonment of the Redwillow Pipeline Project. 

Further to the elements described in CHESS to meet SemCAMS’ environmental goals and objectives, 
other details regarding petroleum releases, emergencies, etc. are described below and in other sections 
of the ESA. 

The environmental effects associated with petroleum releases include contamination of the air, soil and 
water (including groundwater) with hydrocarbons. Discussions of the IMPs designed to prevent petroleum 
releases and the emergency response capabilities in the event that a release does occur are presented in 
Sections 8.6.2 and 8.7 of the ESA. 



SemCAMS Redwillow ULC  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Redwillow Pipeline Project December 2007 / 5149 
 

 
   

Page 8-11 
 
 

Disturbance to the land and watercourses along the right-of-way is the most immediate environmental 
aspect associated with the Project. Wildlife ranges, fish habitat and forested land could potentially be 
impacted during construction. More detailed assessments of these potential impacts are provided 
elsewhere in the ESA, as are mitigation measures to address these concerns (see Section 6.0 of the 
ESA). 

A variety of waste materials, both hazardous and nonhazardous, are generated during pipeline 
construction, operation and maintenance activities. During construction of the Project, procedures 
governing the handling, storage and disposal of all waste materials generated will be enforced. Further 
details on waste management for this Project can be found in Appendix 6C of the ESA. 

8.6.2 Pipeline Integrity Management Program 

SemCAMS recognizes the high consequence potential of its operations, and has, through its operating 
history, identified hazards that are considered potential threats to safe and reliable pipeline operation. A 
combination of management systems, records management systems, condition monitoring, and 
mitigation programs have been developed in response to hazards presented to their pipelines. These 
programs form the foundation of integrity management, and are described in the subsections below. 

SemCAMS’ Pipeline IMP is intended to ensure the long-term functional integrity of its pipeline system, 
which upholds the previously mentioned commitments as stated in the HES Policy. Furthermore, it 
provides for compliance with all applicable regulations and pipeline industry standards. 

Elements found within SemCAMS’ IMP include: 

• Documents and records management; 

• Training and competency; 

• Management of change; 

• Hazard identification and risk assessment; 

• Options for hazard control and risk reduction; 

• Pipeline integrity management planning; 

• Inspection, testing, patrols and monitoring; and 

• Pipeline IMP review and evaluation. 

Documents and Record Management 
The objective of SemCAMS’ Documents and Record Management program is to identify and ensure 
critical or mandatory documentation is managed effectively. Pipeline IMP records are kept for the 
following activities: 

• design and construction – generally provide original and current design information and records 
pertaining to inspections and tests performed; 

• maintenance, repair and alteration – records document both direct and indirect maintenance activities 
and changes performed to the pipeline after initial operation up to and including decommissioning of 
the pipeline; 

• operating – records provide information for the safe and reliable operation of the pipeline including 
operating procedures and conditions and any changes to either. Cathodic protection, pigging, routine 
monitoring, etc. also require records of a non-detailed but continuous nature, such as a log; and 



SemCAMS Redwillow ULC  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Redwillow Pipeline Project December 2007 / 5149 
 

 
   

Page 8-12 
 
 

• corrosion integrity management and inspection – records are those directly related to the integrity 
management, corrosion monitoring and assessment, inspection and includes failure analysis records 
and evaluations of the pipeline pressure envelope. 

Retention of the following records is required for existing pipelines and as part of any new pipeline 
construction: 

• the locations of the pipeline with respect to crossings and nearby land developments; 

• Class locations; 

• the design of the pipeline, including limits on pressure, temperature, loading and other operating 
conditions; 

• the standards and specifications for the pipe, components, bolting, and coating materials; 

• material test reports; 

• joining and inspection records; 

• coating and inspection records; 

• terrain, soil type, backfill material and depth of cover; 

• pressure testing; 

• cathodic protection system design and performances; 

• the methods used and the results obtained for the activities included in the pipeline IMP; 

• QA/QC packages; 

• purchase orders and associated information; 

• welding maps/join maps; and 

• pipeline risk assessment. 

Training and Competency 
SemCAMS’ management ensures systems are in place to manage competency and training 
requirements for company personnel, contractors and consultants. The system must ensure appropriate 
knowledge and skills are conveyed and verified for performance of tasks that may affect pipeline integrity. 

SemCAMS’ management will ensure that new technologies, industry best practices and regulatory 
requirements are evaluated, considered and incorporated as appropriate. As such, where critical new 
processes, procedures or practices are introduced or new or different equipment is installed, SemCAMS’ 
management will ensure that adequate training is provided and competency verified prior to 
implementation of task or operation of the equipment. 

Management of Change 
SemCAMS maintains a corporate Management of Change (MOC) procedure to ensure compliance of all 
changes to regulatory requirements and as close as possible to Best Industry and Engineering Practice. 
SemCAMS’ MOC is designed after CSA Z662-03 Annex N, Clause N.8 that requires all pipeline operating 
companies develop and implement a change management process for changes that affect the integrity of 
their pipelines or their ability to manage pipeline integrity. 



SemCAMS Redwillow ULC  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Redwillow Pipeline Project December 2007 / 5149 
 

 
   

Page 8-13 
 
 

Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment 
CSA Z662, Annex B is the basis of SemCAMS’ process for hazard identification and risk assessment, 
thus ensuring compliance and alignment with industry best practice. SemCAMS maintains a database 
called the Pipeline Integrity Data Management System (PIDMS). The PIDMS contains information 
pertaining to all pipelines and pipeline segments owned and or operated by SemCAMS. Information from 
the PIDMS is used to identify all pipelines and gather operating and static information that may directly or 
indirectly be a hazard, or pose an integrity risk. Basic risk ranking can be performed using these data.  

Where hazards that might lead to a failure or external interference incident with the considerable 
consequences are identified, SemCAMS will: 

• asses the risks associated with the identified hazards; and 

• communicate the hazard to pipeline operations for identification measures for monitoring conditions 
that could lead to failure or external interference incident and eliminate or mitigate such conditions. 

Risks deemed to be significant will be evaluated for risk reduction, using options identified in CSA Z662 
Annex N, Section N.12 as a guide. 

Pipeline Integrity Management Planning 
Pipeline Integrity Management plans are generated to consolidate and document activities designed to 
ensure the continued integrity and safe, reliable operation of SemCAMS’ pipelines. To a large extent, 
these activities define the strategy to mitigate hazards or potential hazards identified through the Hazard 
Analysis. SemCAMS has a system in place to ensure required activities are effectively planned, 
scheduled and executed. 

For routine activities (e.g., brushing, signage, patrols, etc.) a matrix is maintained and periodically verified 
outlining all required routine activities. This matrix is based on industry and regulatory standards and is 
used as an essential tool for periodic verification that required activities are being scheduled and 
performed. 

For non-routine and critical integrity management activities that may directly affect the pipeline’s ability to 
contain product (e.g., chemical programs, pigging programs, leak detection, etc.), a Pipeline IMP is 
developed to detail the requirements. This includes defining the schedule and degree to which certain 
activities are performed and verified. 

All Pipeline IMPs are reviewed annually to ensure they meet applicable requirements, and to ensure that 
the plan is still valid. Verification of each plan will also confirm with operations that operating conditions of 
a particular pipeline have not changed over the past year. 

Inspection, Testing, Patrols and Monitoring 
SemCAMS will ensure inspection, testing, patrol and monitoring requirements are well defined and that all 
supporting procedures and guidelines meet applicable requirements. SemCAMS’ Inspection, testing, 
patrol and monitoring requirements including scope, frequency, methods, records, etc. are based on 
industry and regulatory standards (e.g., CSA Z662 and EUB Directive 066 [2005]). SemCAMS’ 
management will ensure that all procedures and guidelines are available to personnel performing the 
work and that all personnel assigned are adequately trained, certified and competent to perform the work. 

Records of all inspection, testing, patrols and monitoring activities will be kept. Appropriate SemCAMS’ 
supervisory staff will review these records and monitor work under their area of responsibility and control. 
Where the results of inspection, testing, patrols and monitoring activities indicate an unmanaged change, 
reveal a new or potential hazard, SemCAMS will generate an Exception Report of the anomaly. A log of 
exceptions will be maintained indicating date initiated, work ordered, description and date closed. 

SemCAMS will maintain a matrix of preferred mitigation and repair options to address anticipated 
conditions or defects that could cause a failure incident with significant consequences. Where repairs and 



SemCAMS Redwillow ULC  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Redwillow Pipeline Project December 2007 / 5149 
 

 
   

Page 8-14 
 
 

alterations are considered, good materials, engineering and construction / installation practices will be 
followed and will meet the requirements of CSA Z662 for the installation and maintenance of pipelines. All 
work will be performed by qualified and competent SemCAMS’ staff or contractors. 

Pipeline IMP Review and Evaluation 
SemCAMS will review the Pipeline IMP annually and/or whenever events or changes are made to codes, 
Acts or regulations governing SemCAMS’ pipelines. Changes and adjustments to the program will also be 
considered when: 

• there are changes to the company, SemCAMS’ pipelines or external factors; 

• the findings, status and trends of corrective actions identified in internal or external audits becomes 
available; 

• the status or trends of integrity performance indicators related to the frequency and consequences of 
external interference incidents and failure incidents and the completion of integrity-related work is 
understood; 

• the status and trends of integrity related issues and recommendations identified during previous 
reviews and evaluations, operations, maintenance or integrity-related work is known; 

• the root cause of recent incidents is understood; 

• the success of problems experienced in detecting and preventing potential failure incidents is 
documented. 

Internal audits of the IMP will be conducted every two years by SemCAMS. External audits of the Pipeline 
IMP will be conducted every four years. Audit scope and objectives will evaluate all corporate 
departments for roles and responsibilities compliance with the Pipeline IMP. A Randomly selected sample 
of SemCAMS-owned and/or operated pipelines will be generated for each audit. SemCAMS’ 
management will ensure that all audits are performed by staff or contractors that are independent of the 
corporate policies and procedures being audited. Auditors must have prior experience with Pipeline IMPs 
and be familiar with program requirements and must span all corporate disciplines. 

8.7 Emergency Response Plan 

SemCAMS has existing ERPs in place for their existing operations. These plans are based on Alberta 
provincial requirements (i.e., EUB). The purpose of an ERP is to protect the safety of the public, 
SemCAMS personnel and provide for greater protection of the environment. The ERP contains the 
criteria for assessing potential emergency situation and outlines the responsibilities and action plans of 
company personnel to inform the affected stakeholders (area residents and the public, as well as 
regulatory, local and provincial government authorities) to resolve an emergency situation effectively and 
efficiently. The expectation is to have a quick response to any incident so that there is no significant effect 
on staff, the public, property or livestock in the area. 

SemCAMS will create a new ERP for the Redwillow Pipeline Project. The new ERP will be filed with 
applicable regulators prior to the commencement of pipeline operations. 

The ERP that will be created for the Redwillow Pipeline will include the following: 

• A telephone directory complete with an Emergency Notification Flow Chart; 

• Area and facility information including pipelines and control systems (e.g., ESD valves); and 

• EPZ information. 

Additional information for each of these components of the ERP is provided in the following sections. 



SemCAMS Redwillow ULC  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Redwillow Pipeline Project December 2007 / 5149 
 

 
   

Page 8-15 
 
 

8.7.1 Telephone Directory 

The ERP will contain a telephone directory that will include contact information for: 

• both SemCAMS head office and regional pipeline and facility operations staff; 

• applicable provincial regulatory agencies (e.g., the EUB Grande Prairie Field Centre); 

• the NEB; 

• industry support service providers (e.g., air monitoring, safety companies, general contractors, etc.);  

• applicable municipal representatives; and 

• emergency services providers (e.g., police, fire, hospitals, etc.). 

The telephone directory contained within the ERP will also contain an Emergency Notification Flow Chart 
that details the order in which notifications are to be made in the event of an emergency. This chart will 
contain contact information for SemCAMS personnel, provincial government and municipal contacts as 
well as emergency and industrial service providers. 

There is more detailed contact information contained within the Emergency Notification Flow Chart 
including applicable contacts for communities in the vicinity of the project area, various branches of 
provincial government that need to be aware of emergency situations (e.g., AIT should there be a need to 
close a provincial highway and reroute traffic onto alternate routes). 

8.7.2 Area and Facility Information 

The ERP will describe the general environmental and social setting of the project area including land 
ownership, municipalities traversed by the pipeline and current industrial and recreational activities that 
are undertaken in the vicinity of the pipeline and associated facilities. Area maps will be provided in the 
ERP that illustrate the route and its proximity to communities, roads, and other public places such as 
campgrounds and parks. 

The ERP will also briefly describe the specifications of the pipeline system including pipeline diameter, 
length, source and delivery points and their legal locations. The location of the ESD valves, as well as 
information regarding maximum operating pressure, volume of gas between ESD valves, sour content of 
this overall volume of gas and other pertinent information that needs to be known in an emergency 
situation will be tabled in this section of the ERP. 

ESD valves are designed to isolate the pipeline system in case of a failure or emergency by minimizing 
the volume of gas that could be released. The ESD valves will be designed to close instantaneously 
following a catastrophic rupture, limiting the volume of gas released to the pipeline segment between the 
ESD valves. The ESD valves will also be designed to be remotely closed from the Pipeline Control Centre 
located in Edson, Alberta. 

8.7.3 Emergency Planning Zone Information 

The ERP covers an area surrounding the pipeline and associated facilities, known as the EPZ, which could 
become hazardous if a hydrocarbon spill or a sour gas release were to occur. In order to protect the safety 
of the public located near its operations, SemCAMS will establish an EPZ surrounding the Redwillow 
Pipeline System in accordance with the EUB EPZ Model Version 1.09 (2006), which considers paramaters 
such the maximum volume of H2S that could be released from the pipeline assuming the line is filled with 
natural gas and is at maximum operating pressure and maximum H2S concentration. The size of the EPZ 
for this project is approximately 14 km on either side of the pipleline in populated areas and approximately 
30 km on either side of the pipeline in nonpopulated regions. 



SemCAMS Redwillow ULC  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Redwillow Pipeline Project December 2007 / 5149 
 

 
   

Page 8-16 
 
 

Public Awareness 
During preparation of the ERP, SemCAMS will identify and consult with the area stakeholders including 
residents, trappers, industry operators, and local authorities within or immediately adjacent to the 
established EPZs to: 

• present information about the ERP as well as provide the stakeholders with the opportunity to 
contribute to the ERP; 

• acquire pertinent information for emergency planning; and 

• discuss any questions and/or concerns stakeholders may have. 

The ERP will provide contact information for all stakeholders that live and/or work or otherwise conduct 
business within the EPZ. The ERP will also detail information regarding reception centres (i.e., muster 
points) for residents, trappers, workers, and anyone else that might be evacuated in an emergency 
situation. SemCAMS’ reviews their ERPs annually in accordance with EUB standards for content and 
format to ensure that the plans meet or exceed the expectation laid out in EUB Directive 071 (EUB 2003). 

8.8 Follow-Up 

The Canadian Environmental Assessment (CEA) Act defines follow-up as: 

"a program for verifying the accuracy of the environmental assessment of a project, and 
determining the effectiveness of any measures taken to mitigate the adverse 
environmental effects of the project." 

The Operational Policy Statement Follow-up under the CEA Act provides the following reasons as to why 
a follow-up program should be considered in an ESA: 

• to facilitate better overall project management by considering follow-up program framework at the 
earliest stages of project planning; 

• to provide information on environmental effects and mitigation resulting from project implementation 
that can be used to improve and/or support future ESAs including cumulative effects assessment; 

• to aid in the detection of unanticipated environmental effects; and 

• to support or verify predictions made concerning the likelihood of "no significant environmental 
effects". 

The NEB Filing Manual (2004) acknowledges that monitoring is an integral part of the follow-up program. 
However, CEA Agency notes that compliance monitoring, which verifies the proper implementation of all 
mitigation measures, on its own does not satisfy the requirements of a follow-up program. To that end, in 
addition to the Project-specific EPP (Appendix 6A of the ESA), environmental inspection and preparation 
of an Environmental As-Built Report (Section 8.3 of the ESA) to be undertaken as part of compliance 
monitoring, SemCAMS will conduct a PCMP over a two-year period as described in Section 8.5 of the 
ESA. This program will be one method in determining the effectiveness of measures taken to mitigate the 
adverse environmental effects of the Project and is a requirement of the NEB Filing Manual (2004).  

Analysis and reporting of the results of the PCMP will be in accordance with Guide AA.2 of the NEB Filing 
Manual (2004). Similarly, the reporting of the results of the follow-up program will include a determination 
of the following: 

• whether any post-construction remedial actions were necessary; 

• whether the results of the follow-up program were in accordance with the predicted effects; and  

• whether any lessons were learned. 



SemCAMS Redwillow ULC  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Redwillow Pipeline Project December 2007 / 5149 
 

 
   

Page 8-17 
 
 

8.9 References 

8.9.1 Literature Cited 

Alberta Energy and Utilities Board. 2003. Emergency Preparedness and Response Requirements for the 
Upstream Petroleum Industry. 47 pp. Website: 
http://www.eub.ca/docs/documents/directives/Directive071.pdf. 

Alberta Energy and Utilities Board. 2005. Directive 66: Requirements and Procedures for Pipelines. 
Website: http://www.eub.ca/docs/documents/directives/directive066.pdf. 

Alberta Energy and Utilities Board. 2006. EUBH2S: A Model for Calculating Emergency Response and 
Planning Zones for Sour Gas Facilities. Version 1.09, Public Safety and Air Quality Management, 
Calgary, Alberta. 

National Energy Board. 2004 and revisions. National Energy Board Filing Manual. Website: 
http://www.neb-one.gc.ca/clf-nsi/rpblctn/ctsndrgltn/flngmnl/fmflngmnl-eng.pdf. 

  


	8.0 INSPECTION, MONITORING AND FOLLOW-UP 
	8.1 Environmental Policy 
	8.2 Environmental Education During Construction 
	8.3 Environmental Inspection 
	8.4  Issue Monitoring During Construction 
	8.5 Post-Construction Monitoring Program 
	8.6 Pipeline System Integrity 
	8.7 Emergency Response Plan 
	8.8 Follow-Up 
	8.9  References 




